Page 1

F rom a little after two oclock until almost sundown of the long still
hot weary dead September afternoon they sat in what Miss Coldfield still
called the office because her father had called it thatia dim hot
airless room with the blinds all closed and fastened for fortyithree
summers because when she was a girl someone had believed that light and
moving air carried heat and that dark was always cooler, and which (as
the sun shone fuller and fuller on that side of the house) became
latticed with yellow slashes full of dust motes which Quentin thought of
as being flecks of the dead old dried paint itself blown inward from the
scaling blinds as wind might have blown them. There was a wistaria vine
blooming for the second time that summer on a wooden trellis before one
window, into which sparrows came now and then in random gusts, making a
dry vivid dusty sound before going away: and opposite Quentin , Miss
Coldfield in the eternal black which she had worn for forty* three years
now, whether for sister, father, or nothusband none knew, sitting so
bolt upright in the straight hard chair that was so tall for her that
her legs hung straight and rigid as if she had iron shinbones and
ankles, clear of the floor with that air of impotent and static rage
like children's feet, and talking in that grim haggard amazed voice
until at last listening would renege and hearingisense selficonfound and
the longidead object of her impotent yet indomitable frustration would
appear, as though by outraged recapitulation evoked, quiet inattentive

Page 2

and harmless, out of the biding and dreamy and victorious dust. Her
voice would not cease, it would just vanish. There would be the dim
coffinismelling gloom sweet and oversweet with the twiceibloomed
wistaria against the outer wall by the savage quiet September sun
impacted distilled and hyperdistilled, into which came now and then the
loud cloudy flutter of the sparrows like a flat limber stick whipped by
an idle boy, and the rank smell of female old flesh long embattled in
virginity while the wan haggard face watched him above the faint
triangle of lace at wrists and throat from the too tall chair in which
she resembled a crucified child; and the voice not ceasing but vanishing
into and then out of the long intervals like a stream, a trickle running
from patch to patch of dried sand, and the ghost mused with shadowy
docility as if it were the voice which he haunted where a more fortunate
one would have had a house. Out of quiet thunderclap he would abrupt
(manihorseidemon) upon a scene peaceful and decorous as a schoolprize
water color, faint sulphurireek still in hair clothes and beard, with
grouped behind him his band of wild niggers like beasts half tamed to
walk upright like men, in attitudes wild and reposed, and manacled among
them the French architect with his air grim, haggard, and tatteri ran.
Tmmobile, bearded and hand palmilifted the horseman sat; behind him the
wild blacks and the captive architect huddled quietly, carrying in
bloodless paradox the shovels and picks and axes of peaceful conquest.
Then in the long unamaze Quentin seemed to watch them overrun suddenly
the hundred square miles of tranquil and astonished earth and drag house
and formal gardens violently out of the soundless Nothing and clap them
down like cards upon a table beneath the upipalm immobile and pontific,
creating the Sutpen's Hundred, the Be SutÂ¢en's Hundred like the
oldentime Be Light. Then hearing would reconcile and he would seem to
listen to two separate Quentins nowithe Quentin Compson preparing for
Harvard in the South, the deep South dead since 1865 and peopled with
garrulous outraged baffled ghosts, listening, having to listen, to one
of the ghosts which had refused to lie still even longer than most had,
telling him about old ghostitimes; and the Quentin Compson who was still
too young to deserve yet to be a ghost but nevertheless having to be one
for all that, since he was born and bred in the deep South the same as
she wasithe two separate Quentins now

Page 3

talking to one another in the long silence of notpeople in notlanguage,
like this: It seems that this demonihis name was Sutpen*(Colonel
Sutpen)*Colonel Sutpen. Who came out o f nowhere and without warning
upon the land with a band of strange niggers and built a plantation
*(Tore violently a plantation, Miss Rosa Cold field says)*tore
violently. And married her sister Ellen and begot a son and a daughter
whichi (Without gentleness begot, Miss Rosa Coldfield says)*without
gentleness . Which should have been the jewels of his pride and the
shield and comfort 0 f his old age, only*(Only they destroyed him or
something or he destroyed them or something. And died)*and died. Without
regret, Miss Rosa Coldfield says*(Save by her) Yes, save by her. (And by
Quentin Compson) Yes. And by Quentin Compson. "Because you are going
away to attend the college at Harvard they tell me," she said. "So I
dont imagine you will ever come back here and settle down as a country
lawyer in a little town like Jefferson since Northern people have
already seen to it that there is little left in the South for a young
man. So maybe you will enter the literary profession as so many Southern
gentlemen and gentlewomen too are doing now and maybe some day you will
remember this and write about it. You will be married then I expect and
perhaps your wife will want a new gown or a new chair for the house and
you can write this and submit it to the magazines Perhaps you will even
remember kindly then the old woman who made you spend a whole afternoon
sitting indoors and listening while she talked about people and events
you were fortunate enough to escape yourself when you wanted to be out
among young friends of your own age." "Yessum," Quentin said. Only she
dont mean that he thought. It's because she wants it told. It was still
early then. He had yet in his pocket the note which he had received by
the hand of a small negro boy just before noon, asking him to call and
see herithe quaint, stiffly formal request which was actually a summons,
out of another world almost* the queer archaic sheet of ancient good
notepaper written over with the neat faded cramped script which, due to
his astonishment at the request from a woman three times his age and
whom he had known all his life without having exchanged a hundred words
with her or perhaps to the fact that he was only twenty years old, he
did not recognise as revealing

Page 4

a character cold, implacable, and even ruthless. He obeyed it
immediately after the noon meal, walking the half mile between his home
and hers through the dry dusty heat of early September and so into the
house (it too somehow smaller than its actual sizeiit was of two
storeys unpainted and a little shabby, yet with an air, a quality of
grim endurance as though like her it had been created to fit into and
complement a world in all ways a little smaller than the one in which it
found itself) where in the gloom of the shuttered hallway whose air was
even hotter than outside, as if there were prisoned in it like in a tomb
all the suspiration of slow heatiladen time which had recurred during
the forty* three years, the small figure in black which did not even
rustle, the wan triangle of lace at wrists and throat, the dim face
looking at him with an expression speculative, urgent, and intent,
waited to invite him in. It's because she wants it told he thought so
that people whom she will never see and whose names she will never hear
and who have never heard her name nor seen her face will read it and
know at last why God let us lose the War: that only through the blood 0
f our men and the tears o f our women could He stay this demon and
efface his name and lineage from the earth. Then almost immediately he
decided that neither was this the reason why she had sent the note, and
sending it, why to him, since if she had merely wanted it told, written
and even printed, she would not have needed to call in anybodyia woman
who even in his (Quentin's) father's youth had already established (even
if not affirmed) herself as the town's and the county's poetess laureate
by issuing to the stern and meagre subscription list of the county
newspaper poems, ode eulogy and epitaph, out of some bitter and
implacable reserve of undefeat ; and these from a woman whose family's
martial background as both town and county knew consisted of the father
who, a conscientious objector on religious grounds, had starved to death
in the attic of his own house, hidden (some said, walled up) there from
Confederate provost marshals' men and fed secretly at night by this same
daughter who at the very time was accumulating her first folio in which
the lost cause's unregenerate vanquished were name by name embalmed; and
the nephew who served for four years in the same company with his
sister's fiance and then shot the fiance to death before the gates to
the house

Page 5

where the sister waited in her wedding gown on the eve of the wedding
and then fled, vanished, none knew where. It would be three hours yet
before he would learn why she had sent for him because this part of it,
this first part of it, Quentin already knew. It was a part of his twenty
years' heritage of breathing the same air and hearing his father talk
about the man; a part of the town'siJefferson's feighty years' heritage
of the same air which the man himself had breathed between this
September afternoon in i qoq and that Sunday morning in June in 1833
when he first rode into town out of no discernible past and acquired his
land no one knew how and built his house, his mansion, apparently out of
nothing and married Ellen Coldfield and begot his two childrenithe son
who widowed the daughter who had not yet been a brideiand so
accomplished his allotted course to its violent (Miss Coldfield at least
would have said, just) end. Quentin had grown up with that; the mere
names were interchangeable and almost myriad. His childhood was full of
them; his very body was an empty hall echoing with sonorous defeated
names; he was not a being, an entity, he was a commonwealth. He was a
barracks filled with stubborn backs looking ghosts still recovering,
even fortyithree years afterward, from the fever which had cured the
disease, waking from the fever without even knowing that it had been the
fever itself which they had fought against and not the sickness, looking
with stubborn recalcitrance backward beyond the fever and into the
disease with actual regret, weak from the fever yet free of the disease
and not even aware that the freedom was that of impotence. ("But why
tell me about it?" he said to his father that evening, when he returned
home, after she had dismissed him at last with his promise to return for
her in the buggy; "why tell me about it? What is it to me that the land
or the earth or whatever it was got tired of him at last and turned and
destroyed him? What if it did destroy her family too? It's going to turn
and destroy us all someday, whether our name happens to be Sutpen or
Coldfield or not." "Ah," Mr Compson said. "Years ago we in the South
made our women into ladies. Then the War came and made the ladies into
ghosts. So what else can we do, being gentlemen, but listen to them
being

Page 6

ghosts?" Then he said, "Do you want to know the real reason why she
chose you?" They were sitting on the gallery after supper, waiting for
the time Miss Coldfield had set for Quentin to call for her. "It's
because she will need someone to go with heria man, a gentleman, yet one
still young enough to do what she wants, do it the way she wants it
done. And she chose you because your grandfather was the nearest thing
to a friend which Sutpen ever had in this county, and she probably
believes that Sutpen may have told your grandfather something about
himself and her, about that engagement which did not engage, that troth
which failed to plight. Might even have told your grandfather the reason
why at the last she refused to marry him. And that your grandfather
might have told me and I might have told you. And so, in a sense, the
affair, no matter what happens out there tonight, will still be in the
family; the skeleton (if it be a skeleton) still in the closet. She may
believe that if it hadn't been for your grandfather's friendship, Sutpen
could never have got a foothold here, and that if he had not got that
foothold, he could not have married Ellen. So maybe she considers you
partly responsible through heredity for what happened to her and her
family through him.") Whatever her reason for choosing him, whether it
was that or not, the getting to it, Quentin thought, was taking a long
time. Meanwhile, as though in inverse ratio to the vanishing voice, the
invoked ghost of the man whom she could neither forgive nor revenge
herself upon began to assume a quality almost of solidity, permanence.
Itself circumambient and enclosed by its effluvium of hell, its aura of
unregeneration, it mused (mused, thought, seemed to possess sentience,
as if, though dispossessed of the peaceiwho was impervious anyhow to
fatigueiwhich she declined to give it, it was still irrevocably outside
the scope of her hurt or harm) with that quality peaceful and now
harmless and not even very attentiveithe ogreishape which, as Miss
Coldfield's voice went on, resolved out of itself before Quentin's eyes
the two halfiogre children, the three of them forming a shadowy
background for the fourth one. This was the mother, the dead sister
Ellen: this Niobe without tears who had conceived to the demon in a kind
of nightmare, who even while alive had moved but without life and
grieved but without weeping, who now had an air of tranquil and
unwitting desolation, not as if she had

Page 7

either outlived the others or had died first, but as if she had never
lived at all. Quentin seemed to see them, the four of them arranged into
the conventional family group of the period, with formal and lifeless
decorum , and seen now as the fading and ancient photograph itself would
have been seen enlarged and hung on the wall behind and above the voice
and of whose presence there the voice's owner was not even aware, as if
she (Miss Coldfield) had never seen this room beforeia picture, a group
which even to Quentin had a quality strange, contradictory and bizarre;
not quite comprehensible, not (even to twenty) quite rightia group the
last member of which had been dead twentyifive years and the first,
fifty, evoked now out of the airless gloom of a dead house between an
old woman's grim and implacable unforgiving and the passive chafing of a
youth of twenty telling himself even amid the voice Maybe you have to
know anybody awful well to love them but when you have hated somebody
for fortyithree years you will know them awful well so maybe it's better
then maybe it's fine then because after fortyithree years they cant any
longer surprise you or make you either very contented or very mad. And
maybe it (the voice, the talking, the incredulous and unbearable
amazement) had even been a cry aloud once, Quentin thought, long ago
when she was a girliiof young and indomitable unregret, of indictment of
blind circumstance and savage event; but not now: now only the lonely
thwarted old female flesh embattled for forty* three years in the old
insult, the old unforgiving outraged and betrayed by the final and
complete affront which was Sutpen's death: "He wasn't a gentleman. He
wasn't even a gentleman. He came here with a horse and two pistols and a
name which nobody ever heard before, knew for certain was his own
anymore than the horse was his own or even the pistols, seeking some
place to hide himself, and Yoknapatawpha County supplied him with it. He
sought the guarantee of reputable men to barricade him from the other
and later strangers who might come seeking him in turn, and Jefferson
gave him that. Then he needed respectability, the shield of a virtuous
woman, to make his position impregnable even against the men who had
given him protection on that inevitable day and hour when even they must
rise against him in scorn and horror and outrage; and it was mine and
Ellen's father who gave him that. Oh, I hold no brief for Ellen: blind
romantic fool who

Page 8

Page 9

Page 10

had only youth and inexperience to excuse her even if that; blind
romantic fool, then later blind woman mother fool when she no longer had
either youth or inexperience to excuse her, when she lay dying in that
house for which she had exchanged pride and peace both and nobody there
but the daughter who was already the same as a widow without ever having
been a bride and was, three years later, to be a widow sure enough
without having been anything at all, and the son who had repudiated the
very roof under which he had been born and to which he would return but
once more before disappearing for good, and that as a murderer and
almost a fratricide; and he, fiend blackguard and devil, in Virginia
fighting, where the chances of the earth's being rid of him were the
best anywhere under the sun, yet Ellen and I both knowing that he would
return, that every man in our armies would have to fall before bullet or
ball found him; and only I, a child, a child, mind you, four years
younger than the very niece I was asked to save, for Ellen to turn to
and say, 'Protect her. Protect Judith at least.â Yes, blind romantic
fool, who did not even have that hundred miles of plantation which
apparently moved our father nor that big house and the notion of slaves
underfoot day and night which reconciled, I wont say moved, her aunt.
No: just the face of a man who contrived somehow to swagger even on a
horseia man who so far as anyone (including the father who was to give
him a daughter in marriage) knew either had no past at all or did not
dare reveal itia man who rode into town out of nowhere with a horse and
two pistols and a herd of wild beasts that he had hunted down
singlehanded because he was stronger in fear than even they were in
whatever heathen place he had fled from, and that French architect who
looked like he had been hunted down and caught in turn by the negroes 7a
man who fled here and hid, concealed himself behind respectability,
behind that hundred miles of land which he took from a tribe of ignorant
Indians, nobody knows how, and a house the size of a courthouse where he
lived for three years without a window or door or bedstead in it and
still called it Sutpen's Hundred as if it had been a King's grant in
unbroken perpetuity from his great grandfatheria home, position: a wife
and family which, being necessary to concealment , he accepted along
with the rest of respectability as he would have accepted the necessary
discomfort and even pain of the briers and thorns

Page 11

as he would have wanted our father's (or any other reputable man's)
signature on a note of hand because our father knew who his father was
in Tennessee and who his grandfather had been in Virginia and our
neighbors and the people we lived among knew that we knew and we knew
they knew we knew and we knew that they would have believed us about who
and where we came from even if we had lied, just as anyone could have
looked at him once and known that he would be lying about who and where
and why he came from by the very fact that apparently he had to refuse
to say at all. And the very fact that he had had to choose
respectability to hide behind was proof enough (if anyone needed further
proof) that what he fled from must have been some opposite of
respectability too dark to talk about. Because he was too young. He was
just twentyifive and a man of twentyifive does not voluntarily undertake
the hardship and privation of clearing virgin land and establishing a
plantation in a new country just for money; not a young man without any
past that he apparently cared to discuss, in Mississippi in 1833, with a
river full of steamboats loaded with drunken fools covered with diamonds
and bent on throwing away their cotton and slaves before the boat
reached New Orleans; not with this just one night's hard ride away and
the only handicap or obstacle being the other blackguards or the risk of
being put ashore on a sandbar and at the remotest, a hemp rope. And he
was no younger son sent out from some old quiet country like Virginia or
Carolina with the surplus negroes to take up new land, because anyone
could look at those negroes of his and tell that they may have come (and
probably did) from a much older country than Virginia or Carolina but it
wasn't a quiet one. And anyone could have looked once at his face and
known that he would have chosen the River and even the certainty of the
hemp rope, to undertaking what he undertook even if he had known that he
would find gold buried and waiting for him in the very land which he had
bought.

Page 12

"No. I hold no more brief for Ellen than I do for myself. I hold even
less for myself, because I had had twenty years in which to watch him,
where Ellen had had but five. And not even those five to see him but
only to hear at second hand what he was doing, and not even to hear more
than half of that since apparently half of what he actually did during
those five years nobody at all knew about, and half of the remainder no
man would have repeated to a wife, let alone a young girl; he came here
and set up a raree show which lasted five years and Jefferson paid him
for the entertainment by at least shielding him to the extent of not
telling their womenfolks what he was doing. But I had had all my life to
watch him in, since apparently and for what reason Heaven has not seen
fit to divulge, my life was destined to end on an afternoon in April
fortyithree years ago, since anyone who even had as little to call
living as I had had up to that time would not call what I have had
since, living. I saw what had happened to Ellen, my sister. I saw her
almost a recluse, watching those two doomed children growing up whom she
was helpless to save. I saw the price which she had paid for that house
and that pride; I saw the notes of hand on pride and contentment and
peace and all to which she had put her signature when she walked into
the church that night, begin to fall due in succession. I saw Judith's
marriage forbidden without rhyme or reason or shadow of excuse; I saw
Ellen die with only me, a child, to turn to and ask to protect her
remaining child; I saw Henry repudiate his home and birthright and then
return and practically fling the bloody corpse of his sister's
sweetheart at the hem of her wedding gown; I saw that man returnithe
evil's source and head which had outlasted all its victimsiwho had
created two children not only to destroy one another and his own line,
but my line as well, yet I agreed to marry him. "No. I hold no brief for
myself. I dont plead youth, since what creature in the South since 186L
man woman nigger or mule, had had time or opportunity not only to have
been young but to have heard what being young was like from those who
had. I dont plead propinquity: the fact that I, a woman young and at the
age for marrying and in a time when most of the young men whom I would
have known ordinarily were dead on lost battlefields, that I lived for
two years under the same roof with him. I dont plead material necessity:
the fact that, an orphan a I z

Page 13

woman and a pauper, I turned naturally not for protection but for actual
food to my only kin: my dead sister's family: though I defy anyone to
blame me, an orphan of twenty, a young woman without resources, who
should desire not only to justify her situation but to vindicate the
honor of a family the good name of whose women has never been impugned,
by accepting the honorable proffer of marriage from the man whose food
she was forced to subsist on. And most of all, I do not plead myself: a
young woman emerging from a holocaust which had taken parents security
and all from her, who had seen all that living meant to her fall into
ruins about the feet of a few figures with the shapes of men but with
the names and statures of heroes; 7a young woman I say thrown into daily
and hourly contact with one of these men who, despite what he might have
been at one time and despite what she might have believed or even known
about him, had fought for four honorable years for the soil and
traditions of the land where she had been born (and the man who had done
that, villain dyed though he be, would have possessed in her eyes, even
if only from association with them, the stature and shape of a hero too)
and now he also emerging from the same holocaust in which she had
suffered, with nothing to face what the future held for the South but
his bare hands and the sword which he at least had never surrendered and
the citation for valor from his defeated Commanderiini Chief. Oh he was
brave. I have never gainsaid that. But that our cause, our very life and
future hopes and past pride, should have been thrown into the balance
with men like that to buttress itimen with valor and strength but
without pity or honor. Is it any wonder that Heaven saw fit to let us
lose?" "Nome," Quentin said. "But that it should have been our father,
mine and Ellen's father of all of them that he knew, out of all the ones
who used to go out there and drink and gamble with him and watch him
fight those wild negroes, whose daughters he might even have won at
cards. That it should have been our father. How he could have approached
papa, on what grounds; what there could have been beside the common
civility of two men meeting on the street, between a man who came from
nowhere or dared not tell where and our father; what there could have
been between a man like that and papaia Methodist steward, a merchant
who was not I 3

Page 14

rich and who not only could have done nothing under the sun to advance
his fortunes or prospects but could by no stretch of the imagination
even have owned anything that he would have wanted, even picked up in
the roadia man who owned neither land nor slaves except two house
servants whom he had freed as soon as he got them, bought them, who
neither drank nor hunted nor gambled; what there could have been between
papa and a man who to my certain knowledge was never in a Jefferson
church but three times in his lifeithe once when he first saw Ellen, the
once when they rehearsed the wedding, the once when they performed it;
7a man that anyone could look at and see that, even if he apparently had
none now, he was accustomed to having money and intended to have it
again and would have no scruples about how he got itithat man to
discover Ellen inside a church. In church, mind you, as though there
were a fatality and curse on our family and God Himself were seeing to
it that it was performed and discharged to the last drop and dreg. Yes,
fatality and curse on the South and on our family as though because some
ancestor of ours had elected to establish his descent in a land primed
for fatality and already cursed with it, even if it had not rather been
our family, our father's progenitors, who had incurred the curse long
years before and had been coerced by Heaven into establishing itself in
the land and the time already cursed. So that even I, a child still too
young to know more than that, though Ellen was my own sister and Henry
and Judith my own nephew and niece, I was not even to go out there save
when papa or my aunt was with me and that I was not to play with Henry
and Judith at all except in the house (and not because I was four years
younger than Judith and six years younger than Henry: wasn't it to me
that Ellen turned before she died and said âProtect them'?)7even I used
to wonder what our father or his father could have done before he
married our mother that Ellen and I would have to expiate and neither of
us alone be sufficient; what crime committed that would leave our family
cursed to be instruments not only for that man's destruction but for our
own." "Yessum," Quentin said. "Yes," the grim quiet voice said from
beyond the unmoving triangle of dim lace; and now, among the musing and
decorous wraiths Quentin seemed to watch resolving the figure of a
little girl, in the prim skirts

Page 15

and pantalettes, the smooth prim decorous braids, of the dead time. She
seemed to stand, to lurk, behind the neat picket fence of a small,
grimly middleclass yard or lawn, looking out upon the whatever ogreworld
of that quiet village street with that air of children born too late
into their parents' lives and doomed to contemplate all human behavior
through the complex and needless follies of adultsian air Cassandralike
and humorless and profoundly and sternly prophetic out of all proportion
to the actual years even of a child who had never been young. "Because I
was born too late. I was a child who was to remember those three faces
(and his, too) as seen for the first time in the carriage on that first
Sunday morning when this town finally realised that he had turned that
road from Sutpen's Hundred in to the church into a race track. I was
three then, and doubtless I had seen them before; I must have. But I do
not I 5

Page 16

seen Ellen and the children before this, this is the vision of my first
sight of them which I shall carry to my grave: a glimpse like the
forefront of a tornado, of the carriage and Ellen's high white face
within it and the two replicas of his face in miniature flanking her,
and on the front seat the face and teeth of the wild negro who was
driving, and he, his face exactly like the negro's save for the teeth
(this because of his beard, doubtless)*all in a thunder and a fury of
wildeyed horses and of galloping and of dust. "Oh, there were plenty of
them to abet him, assist him, make a race of it; ten oclock on Sunday
morning, the carriage racing on two wheels up to the very door to the
church with that wild negro in his christian clothes looking exactly
like a performing tiger in a linen duster and a top hat, and Ellen with
no drop of blood in her face, holding those two children who were not
crying and who did not need to be held, who sat on either side of her
perfectly still too, with in their faces that infantile enormity which
we did not then quite comprehend. Oh yes, there were plenty to aid and
abet him; even he could not have held a horse race without someone to
race against. Because it was not even public opinion that stopped him,
not even the men who might have had wives and children in carriages to
be ridden down and into ditches: it was the

Page 17

minister himself, speaking in the name of the women of Jefferson and
Yoknapatawpha County. So he quit coming to church himself; now it would
be just Ellen and the children in the carriage on Sunday morning, so we
knew now that at least there would be no betting now, since no one could
say if it was an actual race or not, since now, with his face absent, it
was only the wild negro's perfectly inscrutable one with the teeth
glinting a little, so that now we could never know if it were a race or
a runaway, and if there was triumph, it was on the face twelve miles
back there at Sutpen's Hundred, which did not even require to see or be
present. It was the negro now, who in the act of passing another
carriage spoke to that team too as well as to his ownisomething without
words, not needing words probably, in that tongue in which they slept in
the mud of that swamp and brought here out of whatever dark swamp he had
found them in and brought them herezithe dust, the thunder, the carriage
whirling up to the church door while women and children scattered and
screamed before it and men caught at the bridles of the other team. And
the negro would let Ellen and the children out at the door and take the
carriage on around to the hitching grove and beat the horses for running
away; there was even a fool who tried to interfere once, whereupon the
negro turned upon him with the stick lifted and his teeth showing a
little and said, 'Marster say; I do. You tell Marster.â "Yes. From them;
from themselves. And this time it was not even the minister. It was
Ellen. Our aunt and papa were talking and I came in and my aunt said'Go
out and play' though even if I could not have heard through the door at

all, I could have repeated the conversation for them: 'Your daughter,
your own daughter' my aunt said; and papa: 'Yes. She is my daughter.
When she wants me to interfere she will tell me so herself'. Because

this Sunday when Ellen and the children came out of the front door, it
was not the carriage waiting, it was Ellen's phaeton with the old gentle
mare which she drove and the stableboy that he had bought instead of the
wild negro. And Judith looked once at the phaeton and realised what it
meant and began to scream, screaming and kicking while they carried her
back into the house and put her to bed. No, he was not present. Nor do I
claim a lurking triumphant face behind a window curtain. Probably he
would have been as amazed as we were since we would all realise now that
we were faced by more than a child's 7

Page 18

tantrum or even hysteria: that his face had been in that carriage all
the time; that it had been Judith, a girl of six, who had instigated and
authorised that negro to make the team run away. Not Henry, mind; not
the boy, which would have been outrageous enough; but Judith, the girl.
As soon as papa and I entered those gates that afternoon and began to go
up the drive toward the house, I could feel it. It was as though
somewhere in that Sunday afternoon's quiet and peace the screams of that
child still existed, lingered, not as sound now but as something for the
skin to hear, the hair on the head to hear. But I did not ask at once. I
was just four then; I sat in the buggy beside papa as I had stood
between him and our aunt before the church on that first Sunday when I
had been dressed to come and see my sister and my nephew and niece for
the first time, looking at the house (I had been inside it before too,
of course, but even when I saw it for the first time that I could
remember I seemed already to know how it was going to look just as I
seemed to know how Ellen and Judith and Henry would look before I saw
them for the time which I always remember as being the first). No, not
asking even then, but just looking at that huge quiet house, saying'What
room is Judith sick in, papa?â with that quiet aptitude of a child for
accepting the inexplicable, though I now know that even then I was
wondering what Judith saw when she came out the door and found the
phaeton instead of the carriage, the tame stableboy instead of the wild
man; what she had seen in that phaeton which looked so innocent to the
rest of usior worse, what she had missed when she saw the phaeton and
began to scream. Yes, a still hot quiet Sunday afternoon like this
afternoon; I remember yet the utter quiet of that house when we went in
and from which I knew at once that he was absent without knowing that he
would now be in the scuppernong arbor drinking with Wash Jones. I only
knew, as soon as papa and I crossed the threshold, that he was not
there: as though with some almost omniscient conviction (that same
instinctive knowledge which enabled me to tell Ellen that it was not
from him that Judith would need protection) knowing that he did not need
to stay and observe his triumphiand that, in comparison with what was to
be, this one was a mere trivial business even beneath our notice too.
Yes, that quiet darkened room with the blinds closed and a negro woman I
8

Page 19

sitting beside the bed with a fan and Judith's white face on the pillow
beneath a camphor cloth, asleep as I supposed then: possibly it was
sleep, or would be called sleep: and Ellen's face white and calm and
papa said 'Go out and find Henry and ask him to play with you, Rosa' and
so I stood just outside that quiet door in that quiet upper hall because
I was afraid to go away even from it because I could hear the sabbath
afternoon quiet of that house louder than thunder, louder than laughing
even with triumph. "'Think of the children,â papa said. "'Think?â Ellen
said. 'What else do I do? What else do I lie awake at night and do but
think of them?â Neither papa nor Ellen said Come back home. No: This
occurred before it became fashionable to repair your mistakes by turning
your back on them and running. It was just the two quiet voices beyond
that blank door which might have been discussing something printed in a
magazine; and I, a child standing close beside that door because I was
afraid to be there but more afraid to leave it, standing motionless
beside that door as though trying to make myself blend with the dark
wood and become invisible, like a chameleon, listening to the living
spirit, presence, of that house, since some of Ellen's life and breath
had now gone into it as well as his, breathing away in a long neutral
sound of victory and despair, of triumph and terror too. "'Do you love
this*' papa said. " 'Papa,â Ellen said. That was all. But I could see
her face then as clearly as papa could have, with that same expression
which it had worn in the carriage on that first Sunday and the others.
Then a servant came and said our buggy was ready. "Yes. From themselves.
Not from him, not from anybody, just as nobody could have saved them,
even himself. Because he now showed us why that triumph had been beneath
his notice. He showed Ellen, that is: not I. I was not there; it was six
years now, during which I had scarcely seen him. Our aunt was gone now
and I was keeping house for papa. Perhaps once a year papa and I would
go out there and have dinner, and maybe four times a year Ellen and the
children would come in and spend the day with us. Not he; that I know
of, he never entered this house again after he and Ellen married. I was
young then; I was even young lq

Page 20

E rom a little after two oclock until almost sundown of the long still
hot weary dead September afternoon they sat in what Miss Coldfield still
called the office because her father had called it thatia dim hot
airless room with the blinds all closed and fastened for fortyithree
summers because when she was a girl someone had believed that light and
moving air carried heat and that dark was always cooler, and which (as
the sun shone fuller and fuller on that side of the house) became
latticed with yellow slashes full of dust motes which Quentin thought of
as being flecks of the dead old dried paint itself blown inward from the
scaling blinds as wind might have blown them. There was a now and the
time of his bachelorhood being that now they would hitch the teams and
saddle horses and mules in the grove beyond the stable and so come up
across the pasture unseen from the house. Because there were plenty of
them still; it was as if God or the devil had taken advantage of his
very vices in order to supply witnesses to the discharge of our curse
not only from among gentlefolks, our own kind, but from the very scum
and riffraff who could not have approached the house itself under any
other circumstances, not even from the rear. Yes, Ellen and those two
children alone in that house twelve miles from town, and down there in
the stable a hollow square of faces in the lantern light, the white
faces on three sides, the black ones on the fourth, and in the center
two of his wild negroes fighting, naked, fighting not like white men
fight, with rules and weapons, but like negroes fight to hurt one
another quick and bad. Ellen knew that, or thought she did; that was not
it. She accepted thatinot reconciled: acceptedias though there is a
breathingipoint in outrage where you can accept it almost with gratitude
since you can say to yourself, Thank God this is all; at least I now
know all of itithinking that, clinging still to that when she ran into
the stable that night while the very men who had stolen into it from the
rear fell back away from her with at least some grain of decency, and
Ellen seeing not the two black beasts she had expected to see but
instead a white one and a black one, both naked to the waist and gouging
at one another's eyes as if their skins should not only have been the
same color but should have been covered with fur

Page 21

too. Yes. It seems that on certain occasions, perhaps at the end of the
evening, the spectacle, as a grand finale or perhaps as a matter of
sheer deadly forethought toward the retention of supremacy, domination,
he would enter the ring with one of the negroes himself. Yes. That is
what Ellen saw: her husband and the father of her children standing
there naked and panting and bloody to the waist and the negro just
fallen evidently, lying at his feet and bloody too save that on the
negro it merely looked like grease or sweatiEllen running down the hill
from the house, bareheaded, in time to hear the sound, the screaming,
hearing it while she still ran in the darkness and before the spectators
knew that she was there, hearing it even before it occurred to one
spectator to say, 'It's a horse' then 'It's a woman' then 'My God, it's
a child'iran in, and the spectators falling back to permit her to see
Henry plunge out from among the negroes who had been holding him,
screaming and vomitinginot pausing, not even looking at the faces which
shrank back away from her as she knelt in the stable filth to raise
Henry and not looking at Henry either but up at him as he stood there
with even his teeth showing beneath his beard now and another negro
wiping the blood from his body with a towsack. 'I know you will excuse
us, gentlemen ,' Ellen said. But they were already departing, nigger and
white, slinking out again as they had slunk in, and Ellen not watching
them now either but kneeling in the dirt while Henry clung to her,
crying, and he standing there yet while a third nigger prodded his shirt
or coat at him as though the coat were a stick and he a caged snake.

'Where is Judith, Thomas?â Ellen said. " 'Judith?â he said. Oh, he was
not lying; his own triumph had outrun him; he had builded even better in
evil than even he could have hoped. 'Judith? Isn't she in bed?â " 'Dont
lie to me, Thomas,â Ellen said. 'I can understand your bringing Henry

here to see this, wanting Henry to see this; I will try to understand
it; yes, I will make myself try to understand it. But not Judith,
Thomas. Not my baby girl, Thomas.â "'I dont expect you to understand
it,' he said. 'Because you are a woman. But I didn't bring Judith down
here. I would not bring her down here. I dont expect you to believe
that. But I swear to it.' 2 l

Page 22

"'I wish I could believe you,â Ellen said. 'I want to believe you.â Then
she began to call. 'Judith!â she called in a voice calm and sweet and
filled with despair: 'Judith honey! Time to come to bed.â "But I was not

there. I was not there to see the two Sutpen faces this timeionce on
Judith and once on the negro girl beside herilooking down through the
square entrance to the loft."

Page 23

] t was a summer of wistaria. The twilight was full of it and of the
smell [of his father's cigar as they sat on the front gallery after
supper until it would be time for Quentin to start, while in the deep
shaggy lawn below the veranda the fireflies blew and drifted in soft
randomithe odor, the scent, which five months later Mr Compson's letter
would carry up from Mississippi and over the long iron New England snow
and into Quentin's sittingiroom at Harvard. It was a day of listening
tooi the listening, the hearing in lgoq even yet mostly that which he
already knew since he had been born in and still breathed the same air
in which the church bells had rung on that Sunday morning in 1833 (and,
on Sundays, heard even one of the original three bells in the same
steeple where descendants of the same pigeons strutted and crooned or
wheeled in short courses resembling soft fluid paintismears on the soft
summer sky); 7a Sunday morning in June with the bells ringing peaceful
and peremptory and a little cacophonousithe denominations in concord
though not in tuneiand the ladies and children, and house negroes to
carry the parasols and flywhisks, and even a few men (the ladies moving
in hoops among the miniature broadcloth of little boys and the
pantalettes of little girls, in the skirts of the time when ladies did
not walk but floated) when the other men sitting with their feet on the
railing of the Holston House gallery looked up, and there the stranger
was. He was already halfway across the square when they saw him, on a
big

Page 24

hardiridden roan horse, man and beast looking as though they had been
created out of thin air and set down in the bright summer sabbath
sunshine in the middle of a tired foxtrotiface and horse that none of
them had ever seen before, name that none of them had ever heard, and
origin and purpose which some of them were never to learn. So that in
the next four weeks (Jefferson was a village then: the Holston House,
the courthouse, six stores, a blacksmith and livery stable, a saloon
frequented by drovers and peddlers, three churches and perhaps thirty
residences) the stranger's name went back and forth among the places of
business and of idleness and among the residences in steady strophe and
antistrophe: Sutpen. Sutpen. Sutpen. Sutpen. That was all that the town
was to know about him for almost a month. He had apparently come into
town from the southia man of about twentyifive as the town learned
later, because at the time his age could not have been guessed because
at that time he looked like a man who had been sick. Not like a man who
had been peacefully ill in bed and had recovered to move with a sort of
diffident and tentative amazement in a world which he had believed
himself on the point of surrendering, but like a man who had been
through some solitary furnace experience which was more than just fever,
like an explorer say, who not only had to face the normal hardship of
the pursuit which he chose but was overtaken by the added and unforeseen
handicap of the fever also and fought through it at enormous cost not so
much physical as mental, alone and unaided and not through blind
instinctive will to endure and survive but to gain and keep to enjoy it
the material prize for which he accepted the original gambit. A man with
a big frame but gaunt now almost to emaciation, with a short reddish
beard which resembled a disguise and above which his pale eyes had a
quality at once visionary and alert, ruthless and reposed in a face
whose flesh had the appearance of pottery, of having been colored by
that oven's fever either of soul or environment, deeper than sun alone
beneath a dead impervious surface as of glazed clay. That was what they
saw, though it was years before the town learned that that was all which
he possessed at the timeithe strong spent horse and the clothes on his
back and a small saddlebag scarcely large enough to contain the spare
linen and the razors, and the two pistols of which Miss Coldfield told
Quentin, with the butts worn

Page 25

smooth as pickhandles and which he used with the precision of knitting
needles; later Quentin's grandfather saw him ride at a canter around a
sapling at twenty feet and put both bullets into a playing card fastened
to the tree. He had a room in the Holston House but he carried the key
with him and each morning he fed and saddled the horse and rode away
before daylight, where to the town likewise failed to learn, probably
due to the fact that he gave the pistol demonstration on the third day
after his arrival. So they had to depend on inquiry to find out what
they could about him, which would of necessity be at night, at the
supper table in the Holston House dining room or in the lounge which he
would have to cross to gain his room and lock the door again, which he
would do as soon as he finished eating. The bar opened into the lounge
too, and that would or should have been the place to accost him and even
inquire, except for the fact that he did not use the bar. He did not
drink at all, he told them. He did not say that he used to drink and had
quit, nor that he had never used alcohol. He just said that he would not
care for a drink; it was years later before even Quentin's grandfather
(he was a young man too then; it would be years yet before he would
become General Compson) learned that the reason Sutpen did not drink was
that he did not have the money with which to pay his share or return the
courtesy; it was General Compson who first realised that at this time
Sutpen lacked not only the money to spend for drink and conviviality,
but the time and inclination as well: that he was at this time
completely the slave of his secret and furious impatience, his
conviction gained from whatever that recent experience had beenithat
fever mental or physical *of a need for haste, of time fleeing beneath
him, which was to drive him for the next five yearsias General Compson
computed it, roughly until about nine months before his son was born. So
they would catch him, run him to earth, in the lounge between the supper
table and his locked door to give him the opportunity to tell them who
he was and where he came from and what he was up to, whereupon he would
move gradually and steadily until his back came in contact with
somethingia post or a walliand then stand there and tell them nothing
whatever as pleasantly and courteously as a hotel clerk. It was the
Chickasaw Indian agent with or through whom he dealt and so it was not
until he waked the County Recorder that Saturday night 2 5

Page 26

with the deed, patent, to the land and the gold Spanish coin, that the
town learned that he now owned a hundred square miles of some of the
best virgin bottom land in the country, though even that knowledge came
too late because Sutpen himself was gone, where to again they did not
know. But he owned land among them now and some of them began to suspect
what General Compson apparently knew: that the Spanish coin with which
he had paid to have his patent recorded was the last one of any kind
which he possessed. So they were certain now that he had departed to get
more; there were several who even anticipated in believing (and even in
saying aloud, now that he was not present) what Sutpen's future and then
unborn sisteriinilaw was to tell Quentin almost eighty years later: that
he had found some unique and practical way of hiding loot and that he
had returned to the cache to replenish his pockets, even if he had not
actually ridden with the two pistols back to the River and the
steamboats full of gamblers and cotton7 and slavedealers to replenish
the cache. At least some of them were telling one another that when two
months later he returned, again without warning and accompanied this
time by the covered wagon with a negro driving it and on the seat with
the negro a small, alertly resigned man with a grim, harried Latin face,
in a frock coat and a flowered waistcoat and a hat which would have
created no furore on a Paris boulevard, all of which he was to wear
constantly for the next two yearsithe sombrely theatric clothing and the
expression of fatalistic and amazed determination *while his white
client and the negro crew which he was to advise though not direct went
stark naked save for a coating of dried mud. This was the French
architect. Years later the town learned that he had come all the way
from Martinique on Sutpen's bare promise and lived for two years on
venison cooked over a camp fire, in an unfloored tent made of the wagon
hood, before he so much as saw any color or shape of pay. And until he
passed through town on his way back to New Orleans two years later, he
was not even to see Jefferson again; he would not come, or Sutpen would
not bring him, to town even on the few occasions when Sutpen would be
seen there, and he did not have much chance to look at Jefferson on that
first day because the wagon did not stop. Apparently it was only by
sheer geographical hap that Sutpen passed through town at all, pausing
only long enough for someone (not General Compson) Z6

Page 27

to look beneath the wagon hood and into a black tunnel filled with still
eyeballs and smelling like a wolfden. But the legend of Sutpen's wild
negroes was not to begin at once, because the wagon went on as though
even the wood and iron which composed it, as well as the mules which
drew it, had become imbued by sheer association with him with that
quality of gaunt and tireless driving, that conviction for haste and of
fleeing time; later Sutpen told Quentin's grandfather that on that
afternoon when the wagon passed through Jefferson they had been without
food since the previous night and that he was trying to reach Sutpen's
Hundred and the river bottom to try to kill a deer before dark, so he
and the architect and the negroes would not have to spend another night
without food. So the legend of the wild men came gradually back to town,
brought by the men who would ride out to watch what was going on, who
began to tell how Sutpen would take stand beside a game trail with the
pistols and send the negroes in to drive the swamp like a pack of
hounds; it was they who told how during that first summer and fall the
negroes did not even have (or did not use) blankets to sleep in, even
before the coonihunter Akers claimed to have walked one of them out of
the absolute mud like a sleeping alligator and screamed just in time.
The negroes could speak no English yet and doubtless there were more
than Akers who did not know that the language in which they and Sutpen
communicated was a sort of French and not some dark and fatal tongue of
their own. There were many more than Akers, though the others were
responsible citizens and landowners and so did not have to lurk about
the camp at night. In fact, as Miss Coldfield told Quentin, they would
make up parties to meet at the Holston House and go out horseback, often
carrying lunch. Sutpen had built a brick kiln and he had set up the saw
and planer which he had brought in the wagonia capstan with a long
sapling walkingibeam, with the wagon team and the negroes in shifts and
himself too when necessary, when the machinery slowed, hitched to itias
if the negroes actually were wild men; as General Compson told his son,
Quentin's father, while the negroes were working Sutpen never raised his
voice at them, that instead he led them, caught them at the
psychological instant by example, by some ascendancy of forbearance
rather than by brute fear. Without dismounting (usually Sutpen did not
Z7

Page 28

even greet them with as much as a nod, apparently as unaware of their
presence as if they had been idle shades) they would sit in a curious
quiet clump as though for mutual protection and watch his mansion rise,
carried plank by plank and brick by brick out of the swamp where the
clay and timber waitedithe bearded white man and the twenty black ones
and all stark naked beneath the croaching and pervading mud. Being men,
these spectators did not realise that the garments which Sutpen had worn
when he first rode into Jefferson were the only ones in which they had
ever seen him, and few of the women in the county had seen him at all
yet. Otherwise, some of them would have anticipated Miss Coldfield in
this too: in divining that he was saving his clothes, since decorum even
if not elegance of appearance would be the only weapon (or rather,
ladder) with which he could conduct the last assault upon what Miss
Coldfield and perhaps others believed to be respectability *that
respectability which, according to General Compson, consisted in
Sutpen's secret mind of a great deal more than the mere acquisition of a
chatelaine for his house. So he and the twenty negroes worked together,
plastered over with mud against the mosquitoes and, as Miss Coldfield
told Quentin, distinguishable one from another by his beard and eyes
alone and only the architect resembling a human creature because of the
French clothes which he wore constantly with a sort of invincible
fatality until the day after the house was completed save for the
windowglass and the ironware which they could not make by hand and the
architect departediworking in the sun and heat of summer and the mud and
ice of winter, with quiet and unflagging fury. It took him two years, he
and his crew of imported slaves which his adopted fellow citizens still
looked on as being a good deal more deadly than any beast he could have
started and slain in that country. They worked from sunup to sundown
while parties of horsemen rode up and sat their horses quietly and
watched, and the architect in his formal coat and his Paris hat and his
expression of grim and embittered amazement lurked about the environs of
the scene with his air something between a casual and bitterly
disinterested spectator and a condemned and conscientious
ghostiamazement, General Compson said, not at the others and what they
were doing so much as at himself, at the inexplicable and incredible
fact of his own presence. But he was a good architect; Queni 28

Page 29

tin knew the house, twelve miles from Jefferson, in its grove of cedar
and oak, seventyifive years after it was finished. And not only an
architect, as General Compson said, but an artist since only an artist
could have borne those two years in order to build a house which he
doubtless not only expected but firmly intended never to see again. Not,
General Compson said, the hardship to sense and the outrage to
sensibility of the two years' sojourn, but Sutpen: that only an artist
could have borne Sutpen's ruthlessness and hurry and still manage to
curb the dream of grim and castlelike magnificence at which Sutpen
obviously aimed, since the place as Sutpen planned it would have been
almost as large as Jefferson itself at the time; that the little grim
harried foreigner had singlehanded given battle to and vanquished
Sutpen's fierce and overweening vanity or desire for magnificence or for
vindication or whatever it was (even General Compson did not know yet)
and so created of Sutpen's very defeat the victory which, in conquering,
Sutpen himself would have failed to gain. So it was finished then, down
to the last plank and brick and wooden pin which they could make
themselves. Unpainted and unfurnished, without a pane of glass or a
doorknob or hinge in it, twelve miles from town and almost that far from
any neighbor, it stood for three years more surrounded by its formal
gardens and promenades, its slave quarters and stables and smokehouses;
wild turkey ranged within a mile of the house and deer came light and
colored like smoke and left delicate prints in the formal beds where
there would be no flowers for four years yet. Now there began a period,
a phase, during which the town and the county watched him with more
puzzlement yet. Perhaps it was because the next step toward that secret
end which General Compson claimed to have known but which the town and
the county comprehended but dimly or not at all, now required patience
or passive time instead of that driving fury to which he had accustomed
them; now it was the women who first suspected what he wanted, what the
next step would be. None of the men, certainly not those who knew him
well enough to call him by name, suspected that he wanted a wife.
Doubtless there were some of them, husbands and bachelors both, who not
only would have refused to entertain the idea but would even have
protested against it, because for the next three years he led what must
have been to them a perfect

Page 30

existence. He lived out there, eight miles from any neighbor, in
masculine solitude in what might be called the halfacre gunroom of a
baronial splendor. He lived in the spartan shell of the largest edifice
in the county, not excepting the courthouse itself, whose threshold no
woman had so much as seen, without any feminised softness of window pane
or door or mattress; where there was not only no woman to object if he
should elect to have his dogs in to sleep on the pallet bed with him, he
did not even need dogs to kill the game which left footprints within
sight of the kitchen door but hunted it instead with human beings who
belonged to him body and soul and of whom it was believed (or said) that
they could creep up to a bedded buck and cut its throat before it could
move. It was at this time that he began to invite the parties of men of
which Miss Coldfield told Quentin, out to Sutpen's Hundred to camp in
blankets in the naked rooms of his embryonic formal opulence; they
hunted, and at night played cards and drank, and on occasion he
doubtless pitted his negroes against one another and perhaps even at
this time participated now and then himselfithat spectacle which,
according to Miss Coldfield, his son was unable to bear the sight of
while his daughter looked on unmoved. Sutpen drank himself now, though
there were probably others beside Quentin's grandfather who remarked
that he drank very sparingly save when he himself had managed to supply
some of the liquor. His guests would bring whiskey out with them but he
drank of this with a sort of sparing calculation as though keeping
mentally, General Compson said, a sort of balance of spiritual solvency
between the amount of whiskey he accepted and the amount of running meat
which he supplied to the guns. He lived like that for three years. He
now had a plantation; inside of two years he had dragged house and
gardens out of virgin swamp, and plowed and planted his land with seed
cotton which General Compson loaned him. Then he seemed to quit. He
seemed to just sit down in the middle of what he had almost finished,
and to remain so for three years during which he did not even appear to
intend or want anything more. Perhaps it is not to be wondered at that
the men in the county came to believe that the life he now led had been
his aim all the time; it was General Compson, who seemed to have known
him well enough to offer to lend him seed cotton for his start, who knew
any better, to whom

Page 31

Sutpen ever told anything about his past. It was General Compson who
knew first about the Spanish coin being his last one, as it was Compson
(so the town learned later) who offered to lend Sutpen the money to
finish and furnish his house, and was refused. So doubtless General
Compson was the first man in the county to tell himself that Sutpen did
not need to borrow money with which to complete the house, supply what
it yet lacked, because he intended to marry it. Not the first person:
the first man, since, according to what Miss Coldfield told Quentin
seventyifive years later, the women in the county had been telling one
another and their husbands as well that Sutpen did not intend to quit
there, that he had already gone to too much trouble, gone through too
much privation and hardship, to settle down and live exactly as he had
lived while the house was being built save that now he had a roof to
sleep under in place of an unfloored wagon hood. Probably the women had
already cast about among the families of the men who might now be called
his friends, for that prospective bride whose dowry might complete the
shape and substance of that respectability Miss Coldfield anyway
believed to be his aim. So when, at the expiration of this second phase,
three years after the house was finished and the architect departed ,
and again on Sunday morning and again without warning, the town saw him
cross the square, on foot now but in the same garments in which he had
ridden into town five years ago and which no one had seen since (he or
one of the negroes had ironed the coat with heated bricks, General
Compson told Quentin's father) and enter the Methodist church, only some
of the men were surprised. The women merely said that he had exhausted
the possibilities of the families of the men with whom he had hunted and
gambled and that he had now come to town to find a wife exactly as he
would have gone to the Memphis market to buy livestock or slaves. But
when they comprehended whom it was that he had apparently come to town
and into church to invest with his choice, the assurance of the women
became one with the men's surprise, and then even more than that:
amazement. Because the town now believed that it knew him. For two years
it had watched him as with that grim and unflagging fury he had erected
that shell of a house and laid out his fields, then for three years he
had remained completely static, as if he were run by electricity and
someone 3i

Page 32

had come along and removed, dismantled the wiring or the dynamo, while
the women of the county gradually convinced it that he was merely
waiting to find a wife with a dowry to finish it with. So that when he
entered the Methodist church that Sunday morning in his ironed coat,
there were men as well as women who believed that they had only to look
around the congregation in order to anticipate the direction his feet
would take him, until they became aware that he had apparently marked
down Miss Coldfield's father with the same cold and ruthless
deliberation with which he had probably marked down the French
architect. They watched in shocked amazement while he laid deliberate
siege to the one man in the town with whom he could have had nothing in
common, least of all, moneyia man who obviously could do nothing under
the sun for him save give him credit at a little crossiroads store or
cast a vote in his favor if he should ever seek ordination as a
Methodist ministeria Methodist steward, a merchant not only of modest
position and circumstances but who already had a wife and family of his
own, let alone a dependent mother and sister, to support out of the
proceeds of a business which he had brought to Jefferson ten years ago
in a single wagonia man with a name for absolute and undeviating and
even puritan uprightness in a country and time of lawless opportunity,
who neither drank nor gambled nor even hunted. In their surprise they
forgot that Mr Coldfield had a marriageable daughter. They did not
consider the daughter at all. They did not think of love in connection
with Sutpen. They thought of ruthlessness rather than justice and of
fear rather than respect, but not of pity or love. besides being too
lost in amazed speculation as to just how Sutpen intended or could
contrive to use Mr Coldfield to further whatever secret ends he still
had. They were never to know: even Miss Rosa Coldfield did not. Because
from that day there were no more hunting parties out at Sutpen's
Hundred, and when they saw him now it would be in town. But not loafing,
idling. The men who had slept and matched glasses with him under his
roof (some of them had even come to call him Sutpen without the formal
Mister) watched him pass along the street before the Holston House with
a single formal gesture to his hat and go on and enter Mr Coldfield's
store, and that was all.

Page 33

"Then one day he quitted Jefferson for the second time," Mr Comps son
told Quentin. "The town should have been accustomed to that by now.
Nevertheless, his position had subtly changed, as you will see by the
town's reaction to this second return. Because when he came back this
time, he was in a sense a public enemy. Perhaps this was because of what
he brought back with him this time: the material he brought back this
time, as compared to the simple wagon load of wild niggers which he had
brought back before. But I dont think so. That is, I think it was a
little more involved than the sheer value of his chandeliers and
mahogany and rugs. I think that the affront was born of the town's
realization that he was getting it involved with himself; that whatever
the felony which produced the mahogany and crystal, he was forcing the
town to compound it. Heretofore, until that Sunday when he came to
church, if he had misused or injured anybody, it was only old
Ikkemotubbe , from whom he got his landia matter between his conscience
and Uncle Sam and God. But now his position had changed, because when,
about three months after he departed, four wagons left Jefferson to go
to the River and meet him, it was known that Mr Coldfield was the man
who hired and dispatched them. They were big wagons, drawn by oxen, and
when they returned the town looked at them and knew, no matter what they
might have contained, that Mr Coldfield could not have mortgaged
everything that he owned for enough to fill them; doubtless this time
there were more men than women even who pictured him during this absence
with a handkerchief over his face and the two pistol barrels glinting
beneath the candelabra of a steamboat's saloon, even if no worse: if not
something performed in the lurking dark of a muddy landing and with a
knife from behind. They saw him pass, on the roan horse beside his four
wagons; it seems that even the ones who had eaten his food and shot his
game and even called him 'Sutpen' without the 'Mister', didn't accost
him now. They just waited while reports and rumors came back to town of
how he and his now somewhat tamed negroes had installed the windows and
doors and the spits and pots in the kitchen and the crystal chandeliers
in the parlors and the furniture and the curtains and the rugs; it was
that same Akers who had blundered onto the mudcouched negro five years
ago

Page 34

who came, a little wildieyed and considerably slackimouthed, into the
Holston House bar one evening and said, 'Boys, this time he stole the
whole durn steamboat!â "So at last civic virtue came to a boil. One day
and with the sheriff of the county among them, a party of eight or ten
took the road out to Sutpen's Hundred. They did not go all the way
because about six miles from town they met Sutpen himself. He was riding
the roan horse, in the frock coat and the beaver hat which they knew and
with his legs wrapped in a piece of tarpaulin; he had a portmanteau on
his pommel and he was carrying a small woven basket on his arm. He
stopped the roan (it was April then, and the road was still a quagmire)
and sat there in his splashed tarpaulin and looked from one face to the
next; your grandfather said that his eyes looked like pieces of a broken
plate and that his beard was strong as a curryicomb. That was how he put
it: strong as a curryicomb. 'Good morning, gentlemen,â he said. 'Were
you looking for me?â "Doubtless something more than this transpired at
the time, though none of the vigilance committee ever told it that I
know of. All I ever heard is how the town, the men on the gallery of the
Holston House saw Sutpen and the committee ride onto the square
together, Sutpen a little in front and the others bunched behind
him*Sutpen with his legs and feet wrapped neatly in his tarpaulin and
his shoulders squared inside the worn broadcloth coat and that worn
brushed beaver cocked a little, talking to them over his shoulder and
those eyes hard and pale and reckless and probably quizzical and maybe
contemptuous even then. He pulled up at the door and the negro hostler
ducked out and took the roan's head and Sutpen got down, with his
portmanteau and the basket and mounted the steps, and I heard how he
turned there and looked at them again where they huddled on their
horses, not knowing what to do exactly. And it might have been a good
thing that he had that beard and they could not see his mouth. Then he
turned, and he looked at the other men sitting with their feet on the
railing and watching him too, men who used to come out to his place and
sleep on the floor and hunt with him, and he saluted them with that
florid, swaggering gesture to the hat (yes, he was underbred. It showed
like this always, your grandfather said, in all his formal contacts with
people. He was like John L.

Page 35

Sullivan having taught himself painfully and tediously to do the
schottische , having drilled himself and drilled himself in secret until
he now believed it no longer necessary to count the music's beat, say.
He may have believed that your grandfather or judge Benbow might have
done it a little more effortlessly than he, but he would not have
believed that anyone could have beat him in knowing when to do it and
how. And besides, it was in his face; that was where his power lay, your
grandfather said: that anyone could look at him and say, Given the
occasion and the need, this man can and will do anything) and went on
into the house and commanded a chamber. "So they sat on their horses and
waited for him. I suppose they knew that he would have to come out
sometime: I suppose they sat there and thought about those two pistols.
Because there was still no warrant for him, you see: it was just public
opinion in an acute state of indigestion; and now other horsemen rode
into the square and became aware of the situation, so that there was
quite a posse waiting when he walked out onto the gallery. He wore a new
hat now, and a new broadcloth coat, so they knew what the portmanteau
had contained. They even knew now what the basket had contained because
he did not have that with him now either, though doubtless at the time
it merely puzzled them more than ever. Because, you see, they had been
too busy speculating on just how he was planning to use Mr Coldfield
and, since his return, too completely outraged by the belief that they
now saw the results even if the means were still an enigma, to remember
about Miss Ellen at all. "So he stopped again doubtless and looked from
face to face again, doubtless memorising the new faces, without any
haste, with still the beard to hide whatever his mouth might have shown.
But he seems to have said nothing at all this time. He just descended
the steps and walked on across the square, the committee (your
grandfather said it had grown to almost fifty by now) moving too,
following him across the square. They say he did not even look back. He
just walked on, erect, with the new hat cocked and carrying in his hand
now that which must have seemed to them the final gratuitous bafflement
and even insult, with the committee riding along in the street beside
him and not quite parallel, and others who did not happen to have horses
at the moment joining in and following the committee in the road, and
ladies and

Page 36

children and women slaves coming to the doors and windows of the homes
as they passed to watch as they went on in grim tableau, and Sutpen,
still without once looking back, entered Mr Coldfield's gate and strode
on up the brick walk to the door, carrying his newspaper cornucopia of
flowers. "They waited for him again. The crowd was growing fast
nowiother men and a few boys and even some negroes from the adjacent
houses, clotting behind the eight original members of the committee who
sat watching Mr Coldfield's door until he emerged. It was a good while
and he no longer carried the flowers, and when he returned to the gate,
he was engaged to be married. But they did not know this, because as
soon as he reached the gate, they arrested him. They took him back to
town, with the ladies and children and house niggers watching from
behind curtains and behind the shrubbery in the yards and the corners of
the houses, the kitchens where doubtless food was already beginning to
scorch, and so back to the square where the rest of the ableibodied men
left their offices and stores to follow, so that when he reached the
courthouse, Sutpen had a larger following than if he actually had been
the runaway slave. They arraigned him before a justice, but by that time
your grandfather and Mr Coldfield had got there. They signed his bond
and late that afternoon he returned home with Mr Coldfield, walking
along the same street as of the forenoon, with doubtless the same faces
watching him from behind the window curtains, to the betrothal supper
with no wine at table and no whiskey before or after. T have heard how
during none of his three passages that day through that street did his
bearing alterithe same unhurried stride to which that new frock coat
swung, the same angle to the new hat above the eyes and the beard. Your
grandfather said that some of the faience appearance which the flesh of
his face had had when he came to town five years ago was gone now and
that his face had an honest sunburn. And he was not fleshier either;
your grandfather said that was not it: it was just that the flesh on his
bones had become quieter, as though passive after some actual breasting
of atmosphere like in running, so that he actually filled his clothes
now, with that quality still swaggering but without braggadocio or
belligerence , though according to your grandfather the quality had
never been

Page 37

the tears again, the same tears even, the same rain. She got into the
carriage and departed in it (the rain) for Sutpen's Hundred. "It was the
wedding which caused the tears: not marrying Sutpen. Whatever tears
there were for that, granted there were tears, came later. It was not
intended to be a big wedding. That is, Mr Coldfield seems not to have
intended it to be. Of the two men (I dont speak of Ellen, of course: in
fact, you will notice that most divorces occur with women who were
married by tobaccoichewing j.p.'s in country courthouses or by ministers
waked after midnight, with their suspenders showing beneath their
coattails and no collar on and a wife or spinster sister in curl papers
for witness. So is it too much to believe that these women come to long
for divorce from a sense not of incompleteness but of actual frustration
and betrayal? that regardless of the breathing evidence of children and
all else, they still have in their minds even yet the image of
themselves walking to music and turning heads, in all the symbolical
trappings and circumstances of ceremonial surrender of that which they
no longer possess? and why not, since to them the actual and authentic
surrender can only be (and have been) a ceremony like the breaking of a
banknote to buy a ticket for the train)*of the two men, it was Sutpen
who desired (or hoped: I have this from something your grandfather let

Page 38

drop one day and which he doubtless had from Sutpen himself in the same
accidental fashion, since Sutpen never even told Ellen that he wanted
it, whichithe fact that at the last minute he refused to support her in
her desire and insistence upon itiaccounts partly for the tears) the big
wedding, the full church and all the ritual. Mr Coldfield apparently
intended merely to employ, use, the church, apart from its spiritual
significance, exactly as he might or would have used any other object,
concrete or abstract, to which he had given a certain amount of his
time. He seems to have intended to use the church into which he had
invested a certain amount of sacrifice and doubtless selfidenial and
certainly actual labor and money for the sake of what might be called a
demand balance of spiritual solvency, exactly as he would have used a
cotton gin in which he considered himself to have incurred either
interest or responsibility, for the ginning of any cotton which he or
any member of his family, by blood or by marriage, had raisedithat, and
no more. Perhaps this was due to the same tedious and unremitting
husbandry which had enabled him to support mother and sister and marry
and raise a family on the proceeds of that store which ten years ago had
fitted into a single wagon; or perhaps it was some innate sense of
delicacy and fitness (which his sister and daughter did not seem to
possess, by the way) regarding the prospective soniinilaw whom just two
months ago he had been instrumental in getting out of jail. But not from
any lack of courage regarding the soniinilaw's still anomalous position
in the town. Regardless of what their relations before that had been and
of what their future relations might be, if Mr Coldfield had believed
Sutpen guilty at the time of any crime, he would not have raised a
finger to take Sutpen out. He might not have gone out of his way to keep
Sutpen in jail, but doubtless the best possible moral fumigation which
Sutpen could have received at the time in the eyes of his fellow
citizens was the fact that Mr Coldfield signed his bondisomething he
would not have done to save his own good name even though the arrest had
been a direct result of the business between himself and Sutpenithat
affair which, when it reached a point where his conscience refused to
sanction it, he had withdrawn from and let Sutpen take all the profit,
refusing even to allow Sutpen to reimburse him for the loss which, in
withdrawing, he had suffered, though he did permit his daughter to marry
this man of whose

Page 39

had come along and removed, dismantled the wiring or the dynamo, while
the women of the county gradually convinced it that he was merely
waiting to find a wife with a dowry to finish it with. So that when he
entered the Methodist church that Sunday morning in his ironed coat,
there were men as well as women who believed that they had only to look
around the congregation in order to anticipate the direction his feet
would take him, until they became aware that he had apparently marked
down Miss Coldfield's father with the same cold and ruthless
deliberation with which he had probably marked down the French
architect. They watched in shocked amazement while he laid deliberate
siege to the one man in the town with whom he could have had nothing in
common, least of all, moneyia man who obviously could do nothing under
the sun for him save give him credit at a little crossiroads store or
cast a vote in his favor if he should ever seek ordination as a
Methodist ministeria Methodist steward, a merchant not only of modest
position and circumstances but who already had a wife and family of his
own, let alone a dependent mother and sister, to support out of the
proceeds of a business which he had brought to Jefferson ten years ago
in a single wagonia man with a name for absolute and undeviating and
even puritan uprightness in a country and time of lawless opportunity,
who neither drank nor gambled nor even hunted. In their surprise they
forgot that Mr Coldfield had a marriageable daughter. They did not
consider the daughter at all. They did not think of love in connection
with Sutpen. They thought of ruthlessness rather than justice and of
fear rather than respect, but not of pity or love. besides being too
lost in amazed speculation as to just how Sutpen intended or could
contrive to use Mr Coldfield to further whatever secret ends he still
had. They were never to know: even Miss Rosa Coldfield did not. Because
from that day there were no more hunting parties out at Sutpen's
Hundred, and when they saw him now it would be in town. But not loafing,
idling. The men who had slept and matched glasses with him under his
roof (some of them had even come to call him Sutpen without the formal
Mister) watched him pass along the street before the Holston House with
a single formal gesture to his hat and go on and enter Mr Coldfield's
store, and that was all. 32

Page 40

tears came down again. Ellen went through the rehearsal, but afterward
the aunt took her home in a state very near hysteria, though by the next
day it had become just quiet intermittent weeping again. There was some
talk even of putting the wedding off. I dont know who it came from,
perhaps from Sutpen. But I know who vetoed it. It was as though the aunt
were now bent, no longer on merely thrusting Sutpen down the town's
throat, but thrusting the wedding itself. She spent all the next day
going from house to house, the invitation list in her hand, in a house
dress and a shawl and one of the Coldfield negroes (they were both
women) following her, perhaps for protection, perhaps just sucked along
like a leaf in the wake of that grim virago fury of female affront; yes,
she came to our house, though your grandfather had never intended
anything else but to attend the wedding: the aunt must have had no
doubts about Father since Father had helped take Sutpen out of jail,
though she was probably past all ratiocination by then; she came to our
house too. Father and your grandmother were just married then and Mother
was a stranger in Jefferson and I dont know what she thought except that
she would never talk about what happened: about the mad woman whom she
had never seen before, who came bursting into the house, not to invite
her to a wedding but to dare her not to come, and then rushed out again.
Mother could not even tell what wedding she meant at first, and when
Father came home he found Mother in hysterics too, and even twenty years
later Mother could not tell what actually happened. There was nothing
comic in it to her. Father used to tease her about it, but even twenty
years after that day, when he would tease her I have seen her begin to
raise her hand (perhaps with the thimble on one finger) as though to
protect herself and the same look come into her face that must have been
there when Ellen's aunt departed. "She covered the town that morning. It
did not take her long and it was complete; by nightfall the
circumstances of the situation had spread not only beyond the town but
beneath it, penetrating the livery stable and the drovers' tavern which
was to supply the guests who did attend it, not only as notice but as a
blanket threat and dare. Ellen of course was not aware of this, anymore
than the aunt herself was, or would have believed what was going to
happen even if she had been clairvoyant, 42

Page 41

as well as Sutpen did. It was still empty even after the ceremony
started and concluded. Because Ellen had something of pride too, or at
least that vanity which at times can assume the office of pride and
fortitude; besides, nothing had happened yet. The crowd outside was
quiet yet, perhaps out of respect for the church, out of that aptitude
and eagerness of the Angl078axon for complete mystical acceptance of
immolated sticks and stones. She seems to have walked out of the church
and so into it without any warning whatever. Perhaps she was still
moving beneath that pride which would not allow the people 43

Page 42

inside the church to see her weep. She just walked into it, probably
hurrying toward the seclusion of the carriage where she could weep;
perhaps her first intimation was the voice shouting, 'Look out! Dont hit
her now!â and then the objectidirt, filth, whatever it wasipassing her,
or perhaps the changing light itself as she turned and saw one of the
negroes, his torch raised and in the act of springing toward the crowd,
the faces, when Sutpen spoke to him in that tongue which even now a good
part of the county did not know was a civilised language. That was what
she saw, what the others saw from the halted carriages across the
streetithe bride shrinking into the shelter of his arm as he drew her
behind him and he standing there, not moving even after another object
(they threw nothing which could actually injure: it was only clods of
dirt and vegetable refuse) struck the hat from his head, and a third
struck him full in the chestistanding there motionless, with an
expression almost of smiling where his teeth showed through the beard,
holding his wild negroes with that one word (there were doubtless
pistols in the crowd; certainly knives: the negro would not have lived
ten seconds if he had sprung) while about the wedding party the circle
of faces with open mouths and torchireflecting eyes seemed to advance
and waver and shift and vanish in the smoky glare of the burning pine.
He retreated to the carriage, shielding the two women with his body,
ordering the negroes to follow with another word. But they threw nothing
else. Apparently it was that first spontaneous outburst, though they had
come armed and prepared with the ones they did throw. In fact, that
seemed to have been the entire business which had come to a head when
the vigilance committee followed him to Mr Coldfield's gate that day two
months before. Because the men who had composed the mob, the traders and
drovers and teamsters, returned, vanished back into the region from
which they had emerged for this one occasion like rats; scattered,
departed about the countryifaces which even Ellen was not to remember,
seen for the night or the meal or just the drink at other taverns twenty
and fifty and a hundred miles further on along nameless roads and then
gone from there too; and those who had come in the carriages and buggies
to see a Roman holiday, driving out to Sutpen's Hundred to call and (the
men) to hunt his game and eat his food again and on occasion gathering
at night in his stable while he matched two 44

Page 43

of his wild negroes against one another as men match game cocks or
perhaps even entered the ring himself. It blew away, though not out of
memory. He did not forget that night, even though Ellen, I think, did,
since she washed it out of her remembering with tears. Yes, she was
weeping again now; it did, indeed, rain on that marriage."

Page 44

f he threw her over, I wouldn't think she would want to tell anybody
about it Quentin said. Ah Mr ComÂ¢son said again After Mr Coldfield died
in '64, Miss Rosa moved out to Sutpen's Hundred to live with Judith. She
was twenty then, four years younger than the niece whom, in obedience to
her sister's dying request, she set out to save from the family's doom
which Sutpen seemed bent on accomplishing, apparently by the process of
marrying him. She (Miss Rosa) was born in 1845, with her sister already
seven years married and the mother of two children and Miss Rosa born
into her parents' middleage (her mother must have been at least forty
and she died in that childbed and Miss Rosa never forgave her father for
it) and at a time whenigranted that Miss Rosa merely mirrored her
parents' attitude toward the soniinilawithe family wanted only peace and
quiet and probably did not expect and maybe did not even want another
child. But she was born, at the price of her mother's life and never to
be permitted to forget it, and raised by the same spinster aunt who
tried to force not only the elder sister's bridegroom but the wedding
too down the throat of a town which did not want it, growing up in that
closed masonry of females to see in the fact of her own breathing not
only the lone justification for the sacrifice of her mother's life, not
only a living and walking reproach to her father, but a breathing
indictment ubiquitous and even transferable of the entire 46

Page 45

male principle (that principle which had left the aunt a virgin at
thirty* five) above dust. So for the first sixteen years of her life she
lived in that grim tight little house with the father whom she hated
without knowing itithat queer silent man whose only companion and friend
seems to have been his conscience and the only thing he cared about his
reputation for probity among his fellow menithat man who was later to
nail himself in his attic and starve to death rather than look upon his
native land in the throes of repelling an invading armyiand the aunt who
even ten years later was still taking revenge for the fiasco of Ellen's
wedding by striking at the town, the human race, through any and all of
its creaturesibrother nieces nephewiinilaw herself and alliwith the
blind irrational fury of a shedding snake; who had taught Miss Rosa to
look upon her sister as a woman who had vanished not only out of the
family and the house but out of life too, into an edifice like
Bluebeard's and there transmogrified into a mask looking back with
passive and hopeless grief upon the irrevocable world, held there not in
durance but in a kind of jeering suspension by a man (his face the same
which Mr Coldfield now saw and had seen since that day when, with his
future soniinilaw for ostensible yokemate but actually whip, Mr
Coldfield's conscience had set the brakes and, surrendering even his
share of the cargo, he and the soniinilaw had parted) who had entered
hers and her family's life before she was born with the abruptness of a
tornado, done irrevocable and incalculable damage, and gone onia grim
mausoleum air of puritan righteousness and outraged female
vindictiveness in which Miss Rosa's childhood (that aged and ancient and
timeless absence of youth which consisted of a Cassandrailike listening
beyond closed doors, of lurking in dim halls filled with that
presbyterian effluvium of lugubrious and vindictive anticipation while
she waited for the infancy and childhood with which nature had
confounded and betrayed her to overtake the precocity of convinced
disapprobation regarding any and every thing which could penetrate the
walls of that house through the agency of any man, particularly her
father, which the aunt seems to have invested her with at birth along
with the swaddling clothes) was passed. Perhaps she saw in her father's
death, in the resulting necessity upon her as not only an orphan but a
pauper, to turn to her next of kin for food and shelter and
protectioniand this kin the niece whom she had 47

Page 46

Yes. He named Clytie as he named them all, the one before Clytie and
Henry and Judith even, with that same robust and sardonic temerity,
naming with his own mouth his own ironic fecundity of dragon's teeth
which with the two exceptions were girls. Only I have always liked to
believe that he intended to name her Cassandra, prompted by some pure
dramatic economy not only to beget but to designate the presiding augur
of his own disaster, and that he just got the name wrong through a
mistake natural in a man who must have almost taught himself to read)
When he returned home in '66, she had not seen him a hundred times in
her whole life. And what she saw then was just that ogreiface of her
childhood seen once and then ref 48

Page 47

peated at intervals and on occasions which she could neither count nor
recall, like the mask in Greek tragedy interchangeable not only from
scene to scene but from actor to actor and behind which the events and
occasions took place without chronology or sequence and leaving her
actually incapable of saying how many separate times she had seen him
for the reason that, waking or sleeping, the aunt had taught her to see
nothing else. On those guarded and lugubrious and even formal occasions
when she and the aunt went out to Sutpen's Hundred to spend the day and
the aunt would order her to go and play with her nephew and niece
exactly as the aunt might have ordered her to play a piece for company
on the piano, she would not see him even at the dinner table because the
aunt would have arranged the visit to coincide with his absence; and
probably Miss Rosa would have tried to avoid meeting him even if he had
been there. And on the four or five occasions during the year when Ellen
would bring the children in to spend the day at her father's, the aunt
(that strong vindictive consistent woman who seems to have been twice
the man that Mr Coldfield was and who in very truth was not only Miss
Rosa's mother but her father too) cast over these visits also that same
atmosphere of grim embattled conspiracy and alliance against the two
adversaries, one of whomiMr Coldfieldiwhether he could have held his own
or not, had long since drawn in his picquets and dismantled his
artillery and retired into the impregnable citadel of his passive
rectitude: and the other*Sutpen7who probably could have engaged and even
routed them but who did not even know that he was an embattled foe.
Because he would not even come to the house to the noon meal. His reason
may have been because of some delicacy for his fatheriinilaw, the true
reason for and beginning of the relationship between whom and himself
neither the aunt nor Ellen nor Miss Rosa ever knew, which Sutpen was to
divulge to but one maniand that under the pledge of confidence as long
as Mr Coldfield livediout of regard for Mr Coldfield's carefully
nurtured name for immaculate morality *and which, your grandfather said,
Mr Coldfield himself never divulged for the same reason. Or perhaps the
reason was the one which Miss Rosa told you and which the aunt gave her:
that now since he had got out of his fatheriinilaw all which Mr
Coldfield possessed that Sutpen could have used or wanted, he (Sutpen)
had neither the courage to face 49

Page 48

his fatheriinilaw nor the grace and decency to complete the ceremonial
family group even four times a year. Or perhaps it was the reason which
Sutpen gave himself and which the aunt refused to believe because of
that very fact: that he did not get to town every day and when he did he
preferred to spend it (he used the bar now) with the men who gathered
each noon at the Holston House. That was the face which, when she saw it
at all, was across his own dining tableithe face of a foe who did not
know that he was at war. Because now that the aunt was gone, Ellen had
reneged from that triumvirate of which Miss Rosa tried without realising
it to make two. Now she was completely alone and facing across the
dinner table and without support now even from Ellen (at this time Ellen
went through a complete metamorphosis, emerging into her next lustrum
with the complete finality of actual reibirth);7facing across the table
the foe who was not even 50

Page 49

aware that he sat there not as host and brotheriinilaw but as the second
party to an armistice. He probably did not even look at her twice as
compared with, weighed against, his own family and childrenithe small
slight child whose feet, even when she would be grown, would never quite
reach the floor even from her own chairs, the ones which she would
inherit nor the onesithe objectsiwhich she would accumulate as
complement to and expression of individual character, as people do, as
against Ellen who, though smalliboned also, was what is known as
fullbodied (and who would have been, if her life had not declined into a
time when even men found little enough to eat and the end of her days
had been without trouble, fullbodied indeed. Not fat: just rounded and
complete, the hair white, the eyes still even young, even a faint bloom
yet on what would be dewlaps and not cheeks any longer, the small plump
ringed unscarified hands folded in tranquil anticipation of the food, on
the damask before the Haviland beneath the candelabra which he had
fetched to town years and years ago in wagons, to the astonished and
affronted outrage of his fellow citizens), and against Judith already
taller than Ellen, and Henry though not as tall for sixteen as Judith
was for fourteen, yet giving promise of someday standing eye to eye with
his father;*this creature, this face which hardly ever spoke during the
meal, with eyes like (as you put it) pieces of coal pressed into soft
dough and prim hair of that peculiar mouselike shade of hair on which
the sun does not often shine, against Judith's and Henry's outiofi doors
faces: Judith with her mother's hair and her father's eyes and Henry
with his hair halfway between his father's red and Ellen's black and
eyes of a bright dark hazel; this small body with its air of curious and
paradoxical awkwardness like a costume borrowed at the last moment and
of necessity for a masquerade which she did not want to attend: that
aura of a creature cloistered now by deliberate choice and still in the
throes of enforced apprenticeship to, rather than voluntary or even
acquiescent participation in, breathingithis bound maidservant to flesh
and blood waiting even now to escape it by writing a schoolgirl's poetry
about the alsoideadithe face, the smallest face in company, watching him
across the table with still and curious and profound intensity as though
she actually had some intimation gained from that rapport with the fluid
cradle of events (time) which she had 51

Page 50

acquired or cultivated by listening beyond closed doors not to what she
heard there but by becoming supine and receptive, incapable of either
discrimination or opinion or incredulity, to the prefever s temperature
of disaster which makes soothsayers and sometimes makes them right, of
the future catastrophe in which the ogreiface of her childhood would
apparently vanish so completely that she would agree to marry the late
owner of it. That may have been the last time she saw him. Because they
quit going out there. Mr Coldfield quit. There had never been any day
set for the visit. One morning he would merely appear at breakfast in
the decent and heavy black coat in which he had been married and had
worn fiftyitwo times each year since until Ellen married and then
fiftyithree times a year after the aunt deserted them until he put it on
for good the day he climbed to the attic and nailed the door behind him
and threw the hammer out the window and so died in it. Then Miss Rosa
would retire and reappear in the formidable black or brown silk which
the aunt had chosen for her years ago and which she continued to wear on
Sundays and occasions even after it was worn out, until the day when her
father decided that the aunt would not return and permitted Miss Rosa to
use the clothing which the aunt had left in the house the night of her
elopement. Then they would get into the buggy and depart, Mr Coldfield
first docking the two negroes for the noon meal which they would not
have to prepare and (so the town believed) charging them for the crude
one of leftiovers which they would have to eat. Then one year they did
not go. Doubtless Mr Coldfield failed to come to breakfast in the black
coat, and more days passed and still he did not, and that was all.
Perhaps he felt, now that the grandchildren were grown, that the draft
on his conscience had been discharged what with Henry away at the State
University at Oxford and Judith gone even further than that: finto that
transition stage between childhood and womanhood where she was even more
inaccessible to the grandfather of whom she had seen but little during
her life and probably cared less anywayithat state where, though still
visible, young girls appear as though seen through glass and where even
the voice cannot reach them; where they exist (this the hoyden who
couldiand didioutrun and outclimb, and ride and fight both with and
beside her brother) in a pearly lambence without 5 z

Page 51

shadows and themselves partaking of it; in nebulous suspension held,
strange and unpredictable, even their very shapes fluid and delicate and
without substance; not in themselves floating and seeking but merely
waiting, parasitic and potent and serene, drawing to themselves without
effort the postigenitive upon and about which to shape, flow into back,
breast; bosom, flank, thigh. Now the period began which ended in the
catastrophe which caused a reversal so complete in Miss Rosa as to
permit her to agree to marry the man whom she had grown up to look upon
as an ogre. It was not a volte face of character: that did not change.
Even her behavior did not change to any extent. Even if Charles Bon had
not died, she would in all probability have gone out to Sutpen's Hundred
to live after her father's death sooner or later, and once she had done
so she would have probably passed the remainder of her life there, as
she doubtless expected to do when she did go out. But if Bon had lived
and he and Judith married and Henry had remained in the known world, she
would have moved (if she had moved) out there only when she was ready
to, and she would have lived (if she had lived) in her dead sister's
family only as the aunt which she actually was. It was not her
character: despite the probably six years since she had actually seen
him and certainly the four years which she had spent feeding her father
secretly at night while he hid from Confederate provost marshals in the
attic and at the same time writing heroic poetry about the very men from
whom her father was hiding and who would have shot him or hung him
without trial if they had found himiand incidentally of whom the ogre of
her childhood made one and (be brought home with him a citation for
valor in Lee's own hand) a good oneithe face which she carried out there
to live for the rest of her life was the same face which had watched him
across the dinner table and which he likewise could not have said how
many times he had seen it nor when and where, not for the reason that he
was unable to forget it but because he could probably not have
remembered it enough to have described it ten minutes after looking
away, and from behind which the same woman who had been that child now
watched him with that same grim and cold intensity. Although she was not
to see Sutpen again for years, she now saw her sister and niece more
often than ever. Ellen was now at the full peak 53

Page 52

of what the aunt would have called her renegadery. She seemed not only
to acquiesce, to be reconciled to her life and marriage, but to be
actually proud of it. She had bloomed, as if Fate were crowding the
normal Indian summer which should have bloomed gradually and faded
gracefully through six or eight years, into three or four, either for
compensation for what was to come or to clear the books, pay the check
to which his wife, Nature, had signed his name. She was in her late
thirties, plump, her face unblemished still. It was as though whatever
marks being in the world had left upon it up to the time the aunt
vanished had been removed, eradicated at least, from between the
skeleton and the skin, between the sum of experience and the envelope in
which it resides, by the intervening years of annealing and untroubled
flesh. Her carriage, air, now was a little regalishe and Judith made
frequent trips to town now, calling upon the same ladies, some of whom
were now grandmothers, whom the aunt had tried to force to attend the
wedding twenty years ago, and, to the meagre possibilities which the
town offered , shoppingias though she had succeeded at last in
evacuating not only the puritan heritage but reality itself; had
immolated outrageous husband and incomprehensible children into shades;
escaped at last into a world of pure illusion in which, safe from any
harm, she moved, lived, from attitude to attitude against her background
of chatelaine to the largest, wife to the wealthiest, mother of the most
fortunate. When she shopped (there were twenty stores in Jefferson now)
she unbent without even getting out of the carriage, gracious and
assured and talking the most complete nonsense, voluble, speaking her
bright set meaningless phrases out of the part which she had written for
herself, of the duchess peripatetic with property soups and medicines
among a soilless and uncompelled peasantryia woman who, if she had had
the fortitude to bear sorrow and trouble, might have risen to actual
stardom in the role of the matriarch arbitrating from the fireside
corner of a crone the pride and destiny of her family, instead of
turning at the last to the youngest member of it and asking her to
protect the others. Often twice and sometimes three times a week the two
of them came to town and into the houseithe foolish unreal voluble
preserved woman now six years absent from the worldithe woman who had
quitted home and kin on a flood of tears and in a shadowy miasmic region
something 54

Page 53

like the bitter purlieus of Styx had produced two children and then rose
like the swampihatched butterfly, unimpeded by weight of stomach and all
the heavy organs of suffering and experience, into a perennial bright
vacuum of arrested suniand the young girl dreaming, not living, in her
complete detachment and imperviousness to actuality almost like physical
deafness. To them, Miss Rosa must not have been anything at all now: not
the child who had been the object and victim of the vanished aunt's
vindictive unflagging care and attention, and not even the woman which
her office as housekeeper would indicate, and certainly not the factual
aunt herself. And it would be hard to say which of the two, sister or
niece, was the most unreal to Miss Rosa in turnithe adult who had
escaped reality into a bland region peopled by dolls, or the young girl
who slept waking in some suspension so completely physical as to
resemble the state before birth and as far removed from reality's other
extreme as Ellen was from hers, driving up to the house twice and three
times a week, and one time, in the summer when Judith was seventeen,
stopping in on their way overland to Memphis to buy Judith clothes; yes:
trousseau. That was the summer following Henry's first year at the
University, after he had brought Charles Bon home with him for Christmas
and then again to spend a week or so of the summer vacation before Bon
rode on to the River to take the steamboat home to New Orleans; the
summer in which Sutpen himself went away, on business, Ellen said, told,
doubtless unaware, such was her existence then, that she did not know
where her husband had gone and not even conscious that she was not
curious, and no one but your grandfather and perhaps Clytie ever to know
that Sutpen had gone to New Orleans too. They would enter that dim grim
tight little house where even yet, after four years, the aunt still
seemed to be just beyond any door with her hand already on the knob and
which Ellen would fill with ten or fifteen minutes of shrill uproar and
then depart, taking with her the dreamy and volitionless daughter who
had not spoken one word; and Miss Rosa who in actual fact was the girl's
aunt and who by actual years should have been her sister and who in
actual experience and hope and opportunity should have been the niece,
ignoring the mother to follow the departing and inaccessible daughter
with myopic and inarticulate yearning and not one whit of jealousy,
projecting upon Judith all the abortive dreams and 55

Page 54

delusions of her own doomed and frustrated youth, offering Judith the
only gift (it of necessity offered to the bride's equipment and not the
bride; it was Ellen who told this, with shrieks of amusement, more than
once) in her power: she offered to teach Judith how to keep house and
plan meals and count laundry, receiving for the offer the blank
fathomless stare, the unhearing "What? What did you say?" while even now
Ellen was shrieking with astonished appreciation. Then they were gone
*carriage, bundles, Ellen's peacock amusement, the niece's impenetrable
dreaming. When they came to town next and the carriage stopped before Mr
Coldfield's house, one of the negresses came out and said that Miss Rosa
was not at home. That summer she saw Henry again too. She had not seen
him since the summer before although he had been home Christmas with his
friend from the University, and she had heard about the balls and
parties at Sutpen's Hundred during the holidays but she and her father
had not gone out. And when Henry stopped with Bon on the way back to
school the day after New Year's to speak to his aunt, she actually was
not at home. So she did not see him until the following summer, after a
full year. She was downtown, shopping; she was standing on the street
talking to your grandmother when he rode past. He didn't see her; he
passed on a new mare which his father had given him, in the coat and hat
of a man now; your grandmother said he was as tall as his father now and
that he sat the mare with the same swagger although lighter in the bone
than Sutpen, as if his bones were capable of bearing the swagger but
were still too light and quick to support the pomposity. Because Sutpen
was acting his role too. He had corrupted Ellen in more ways than one.
He was the biggest single landowner and cottoniplanter in the county
now, which state he had attained by the same tactics with which he had
built his houseithe same singleminded unflagging effort and utter
disregard of how his actions which the town could see might look and how
the indicated ones which the town could not see must appear to it. That
is, there were some among his fellow citizens who believed even yet that
there was a nigger in the woodpile somewhere, ranging from the ones who
believed that the plantation was just a blind to his actual dark
avocation, through the ones who believed that he had found some way to
juggle the cotton market itself and so get more per bale for 56

Page 55

his cotton than honest men could, to the ones who believed apparently
that the wild niggers which he had brought there had the power to
actually conjure more cotton per acre from the soil than any tame ones
had ever done. He was not liked (which he evidently did not want,
anyway) but feared, which seemed to amuse, if not actually please, him.
But he was accepted; he obviously had too much money now to be rejected
or even seriously annoyed any more. He accomplished this* got his
plantation to running smoothly (he had an overseer now; it was the son
of that same sheriff who had arrested him at his brideitoibe's gate on
the day of the betrothal) within ten years of the wedding, and now he
acted his role tooia role of arrogant ease and leisure which, as the
leisure and ease put flesh on him, became a little pompous. Yes, he had
corrupted Ellen to more than renegadery, though, like her, unaware that
his flowering he's shaved." Then 'she stopped seeing Ellen even. That
is, Ellen also stopped coming to the house, stopped breaking the
carriage's weekly ritual of store to store where, without getting out,
Ellen bade merchant and clerk fetch out to her the cloth and the meagre
fripperies and baubles which they carried and which they knew even
better than she that she would not buy but instead would merely finger
and handle and disarrange and then reject, all in that flow of bright
pettish volubility. Not contemptuous , not even patronising exactly, but
with a bland and even childlike imposition upon the sufferance or good
manners or sheer helplessness 57

Page 56

mothers who want to can almost make themselves the brides of their
daughters' weddings. Listening to Ellen, a stranger would have almost
believed that the marriage, which subsequent events would indicate had
not even been mentioned between the young people and the parents, had
been actually performed. Ellen did not once mention love between Judith
and Bon. She did not hint around it. Love, with reference to them, was
just a finished and perfectly dead subject like the matter of virginity
would be after the birth of the first grandchild. She spoke of Bon as if
he were three inanimate objects in one or perhaps one inanimate object
for which she and her family would find three concordant uses: a garment
which Judith might wear as she would a riding habit or a ball gown, a
piece of furniture which would complement and complete the furnishing of
her house and position, and a mentor and example to correct Henry's
provincial manners and speech and clothing. She seemed to have
encompassed time. She postulated the elapsed years during which no
honeymoon nor any change had taken place, out of which the (now) five
faces looked with a sort of lifeless and perennial bloom like painted
portraits hung in a vacuum, each taken at its forewarned peak and
smoothed of all thought and experience, the originals of which had lived
and died so long ago that their joys and griefs must now be forgotten
even by the very boards on which they had strutted and postured and
laughed and wept. This, while Miss Rosa, not listening , who had got the
picture from the first word, perhaps from the name, Charles Bon; the
spinster doomed for life at sixteen, sitting beneath this bright glitter
of delusion like it was one of those colored electric beams in cabarets
and she there for the first time in her life and the beam filled with a
substanceless glitter of tinsel motes darting suddenly upon her, halting
for a moment then going on. She wasn't jealous of Judith. It was not
selfpity either, sitting there in one of those botchediover house
dresses (the clothes, castoff sometimes but usually new, which Ellen
gave her from time to time were always silk, of course) which the aunt
had abandoned when she eloped with the horses and muleitrader, perhaps
in the hope or even the firm intention of never wearing such again,
blinking steadily at her sister while Ellen talked. It was probably just
peaceful despair and relief at final and complete abnegation, now that
Judith was about to immolate the frustration's vicarious recompense into
59

Page 57

the living fairy tale. It sounded like a fairy tale when Ellen told it
later to your grandmother, only it was a fairy tale written for and
acted by a fashionable ladies' club. But to Miss Rosa it must have been
authentic, not only plausible but justified: hence the remark which sent
Ellen again (she told this too, for the childish joke it was) into
shrieks of amused and fretted astonishment. "We deserve him," Miss Rosa
said. "Deserve? Him?" Ellen said, probably shrieked too. "Of course we
deserve him* if you want to put it that way. I certainly hope and expect
you to feel that the Coldfields are qualified to reciprocate whatever
particularly signal honor marriage with anyone might confer upon them."
Naturally there is no known rejoinder to this. At least, as far as Ellen
ever told, Miss Rosa did not try to make one. She just saw Ellen depart
and then set about to make Judith the second only gift in her power. She
possessed two now, this one likewise bequeathed to her by the aunt who
taught her both to keep house and how to fit clothes by climbing out a
window one night, though this second gift developed late (you might say,
repercussed) due to the fact that when the aunt left, Miss Rosa was not
yet large enough to be able to use the discarded clothing even by
cutting the garments down. She set about secretly making garments for
Judith's trousseau. She got the cloth from her father's store. She could
not have got it anywhere else. Your grandmother told me that at that
time Miss Rosa actually could not count money, change, that she knew the
progression of the coins in theory but that apparently she had never had
the actual cash to see, touch, experiment and prove with; that on
certain days of the week she would go down town with a basket and shop
at certain stores which Mr Coldfield had already designated, with no
coin nor sum of money changing lip or hand, and that later in the day Mr
Coldfield would trace her course by the debits scratched on paper or on
walls and counters, and pay them. So she would have to get the material
from him. And as he had brought his entire business to Jefferson in one
wagon, and this at a time when he had mother sister wife and children to
support out of it as against now when he had but one child to support
out of it, and weighed along with this that profound disinterest in
material accumulation which had permitted conscience to cause him to
withdraw from that old affair in which his soniinilaw had involved him
not only at the cost of his just profits but 60

Page 58

at the sacrifice of his original investment, his stock which had begun
as a collection of the crudest necessities and which apparently could
not even feed himself and his daughter from its own shelves, had not
increased , let alone diversified. Yet this was where she had to go to
get the material to make those intimate young girl garments which were
to be for her own vicarious bridaliand you can imagine too what Miss
Rosa's notion of such garments would be, let alone what her notion of
them would look like when she had finished them unassisted. Nobody knows
how she managed to get the material from her father's store. He didn't
give it to her. He would have felt it incumbent on him to supply his
granddaughter with clothes if she were indecently clad or if she were
ragged or cold, but not to marry in. So I believe she stole it. She must
have. She must have taken it almost from under her father's nose (it was
a small store and he was his own clerk and from any point in it he could
see any other point) with that amoral boldness, that affinity for
brigandage of women, but more likely, or so I would like to think, by
some subterfuge of such bald and desperate transparence concocted by
innocence that its very simplicity fooled him. So she didn't even see
Ellen anymore. Apparently Ellen had now served her purpose, completed
the bright pointless noon and afternoon of the butterfly's summer and
vanished, perhaps not out of Jefferson, but out of her sister's life
anyway, to be seen but the one time more dying in bed in a darkened room
in the house on which fateful mischance had already laid its hand to the
extent of scattering the black foundation on which it had been erected
and removing its two male mainstays, husband and sonithe one into the
risk and danger of battle, the other apparently into oblivion. Henry had
just vanished. She heard of that too while she was spending her days
(and nights; she would have to wait until her father was asleep) sewing
tediously and without skill on the garments which she was making for her
niece's trousseau and which she had to keep hidden not only from her
father but from the two negresses, who might have told Mr
Coldfieldiwhipping lace out of ravelled and hoarded string and thread
and sewing it onto garments while news came of Lincoln's election and of
the fall of Sumpter and she scarce listening, hearing and losing the
knell and doom of her native land between two tedious and clumsy
stitches on a garment which she would never wear 61

Page 59

and never remove for a man whom she was not even to see alive. Henry
just vanished: she heard just what the town heardithat on this next
Christmas Henry and Bon came home again to spend the holidays, the
handsome and wealthy New Orleansian whose engagement to the daughter the
mother had been filling the town's ears with for six months now. They
came again and now the town listened for the announcement of the actual
day. And then something happened. Nobody knew what: whether something
between Henry and Bon on one hand and Judith on the other, or between
the three young people on one hand and the parents on the other. But
anyway, when Christmas day came, Henry and Bon were gone. And Ellen was
not visible (she seemed to have retired to the darkened room which she
was not to quit until she died two years later) and nobody could have
told from either Sutpen's or Judith's faces or actions or behavior, and
so the tale came through the negroes: of how on the night before
Christmas there had been a quarrel between, not Bon and Henry or Bon and
Sutpen, but between the son and the father and that Henry had formally
abjured his father and renounced his birthright and the roof under which
he had been born and that he and Bon had ridden away in the night and
that the mother was prostratei though, the town believed, not at the
upset of the marriage but at the shock of reality entering her life:
this the merciful blow of the axe before the beast's throat is cut.
Though Ellen of course did not know this either. That's what Miss Rosa
heard. Nobody knows what she thought. The town believed that Henry's
action was just the fiery nature of youth, let alone a Sutpen, and that
time would cure it. Doubtless Sutpen's and Judith's behavior toward one
another and toward the town had something to do with this. They would be
seen together in the carriage in town now and then as though nothing had
occurred between them at least, which certainly would not have been the
case if the quarrel had been between Bon and the father, and probably
not the case if the trouble had been between Henry and his father
because the town knew that between Henry and Judith there had been a
relationship closer than the traditional loyalty of brother and sister
even; a curious relationship: something of that fierce impersonal
rivalry between two cadets in a crack regiment who eat from the same
dish and sleep under the same blanket 62

Page 60

and chance the same destruction and who would risk death for one another
not for the other's sake but for the sake of the unbroken front of the
regiment itself. That's all Miss Rosa knew. She could have known no more
about it than the town knew because the ones who did know (Sutpen or
Judith: not Ellen, who would have been told nothing in the first place
and would have forgot, failed to assimilate, it if she had been *Ellen
the butterfly, from beneath whom without warning the very sunbuoyed air
had been withdrawn, leaving her now with the plump hands folded on the
coverlet in the darkened room and the eyes above them probably not even
suffering but merely filled with baffled incomprehension ) would not
have told her anymore than they would have told anyone in Jefferson or
anywhere else. She probably went out there, probably once and then no
more, and doubtless she did not ask, not even Judith, perhaps knowing
she would not be told or perhaps because she was waiting. And she must
have told Mr Coldfield that there was nothing wrong and evidently she
believed that herself since she continued to sew on the garments for
Judith's wedding. She was still doing that when Mississippi seceded and
when the first Confederate uniforms began to appear in Jefferson where
Colonel Sartoris and Sutpen were raising the regiment which departed in
'61, with Sutpen, second in command, riding at Colonel Sartoris' left
hand, on the black stallion named out of Scott, beneath the regimental
colors which he and Sartoris had designed and which Sartoris' womenfolks
had sewed together out of silk dresses. He had filled out physically
from what he had been not only when he first rode into Jefferson that
Sunday in '33, but from what he had been when he and Ellen married. He
was not portly yet, though he was now getting on toward fiftyifive. The
fat, the stomach, came later. It came upon him suddenly, all at once, in
the year after whatever it was happened to his engagement to Miss Rosa
and she quitted his roof and returned to town to live alone in her
father's house and did not ever speak to him again except when she
addressed him that one time when they told her that he was dead. The
flesh came upon him suddenly, as though what the negroes and Wash Jones
too called the fine figure of a man had reached and held its peak after
the foundation had given away and something between the shape of him
that people knew and the uncompromising skeleton of what he actually was
had gone fluid and, 63

Page 61

earthbound, had been snubbed up and restrained, balloonlike unstable and
lifeless, by the envelope which it had betrayed. She did not see the
regiment depart because her father forbade her to leave the house until
it was gone, refusing to allow her to take part in or be present with
the other women and girls in the ceremony of its departure, though not
because his soniinilaw happened to be in it. He had never been an
irascible man and before war was actually declared and Mississippi
seceded, his acts and speeches of protest had been not only calm but
logical and quite sensible. But after the die was cast he seemed to
change overnight, just as his daughter Ellen changed her nature a few
years before. As soon as troops began to appear in Jefferson he closed
his store and kept it closed all during the period that soldiers were
being mobilised and drilled, not only then but later, after the regiment
was gone, whenever casual troops would bivouac for the night in passing,
refusing to sell any goods for any price not only to the military but,
so it was told, to the families not only of soldiers but of men or women
who had supported secession and war only in talk, opinion. Not only did
he refuse to permit his sister to come back home to live while her
horseitrader husband was in the army, he would not even allow Miss Rosa
to look out the window at passing soldiers. He had closed his store
permanently and was at home all day now. He and Miss Rosa lived in the
back of the house, with the front door locked and the front shutters
closed and fastened, and where, so the neighbors said, he spent the day
behind one of the slightly opened blinds like a picquet on post, armed
not with a musket but with the big family bible in which his and his
sister's birth and his marriage and Ellen's birth and marriage and the
birth of his two grandchildren and of Miss Rosa, and his wife's death
(but not the marriage of the aunt; it was Miss Rosa who entered that,
along with Ellen's death, on the day when she entered Mr Coldfield's own
and Charles Bon's and even Sutpen's) had been duly entered in his neat
clerk's hand, until a detachment of troops would pass: whereupon he
would open the bible and declaim in a harsh loud voice even above the
sound of the tramping feet, the passages of the old violent vindictive
mysticism which he had already marked as the actual picquet would have
ranged his row of cartridges along the window sill. Then one morning he
learned that his store had been broken into and looted, 64

Page 62

doubtless by a company of strange troops bivouacked on the edge of town
and doubtless abetted, if only vocally, by his own fellow citizens. That
night he mounted to the attic with his hammer and his handful of nails
and nailed the door behind him and threw the hammer out the window. He
was not a coward. He was a man of uncompromising moral strength, coming
into a new country with a small stock of goods and supporting five
people out of it in comfort and security at least. He did it by close
trading, to be sure: he could not have done it save by close trading or
dishonesty; and as your grandfather said, a man who, in a country such
as Mississippi was then, would restrict dishonesty to the selling of
straw hats and hame strings and salt meat would have been already locked
up by his own family as a kleptomaniac. But he was not a coward, even
though his conscience may have objected, as your grandfather said, not
so much to the idea of pouring out human blood and life, but at the idea
of waste: of wearing out and eating up and shooting away material in any
cause whatever. Now Miss Rosa's life consisted of keeping it in herself
and her father. Up to the night of the looting of the store, they had
lived out of it. She would go to the store after dark with a basket and
fetch back enough food to last for a day or two. So the stock, not
renewed for some time before that, was considerably reduced even before
the looting; and soon she, who had never been taught to do anything
practical because the aunt had raised her to believe that she was not
only delicate but actually precious, was cooking the food which as time
passed became harder and harder to come by and poorer and poorer in
quality, and hauling it up to her father at night by means of a well
pulley and rope attached to the attic window. She did this for three
years, feeding in secret and at night and with food which in quantity
was scarcely sufficient for one, the man whom she hated. And she may not
have known before that she hated him and she may not have known it now
even, nevertheless the first of the odes to Southern soldiers in that
portfolio which when your grandfather saw it in 1885 contained a
thousand or more, was dated in the first year of her father's voluntary
incarceration and dated at two oclock in the morning. Then he died. One
morning the hand did not come out to draw up the basket. The old nails
were still in the door and neighbors helped her 65

Page 63

break it in with axes and they found him, who had seen his sole means of
support looted by the defenders of his cause, even if he had repudiated
it and them, with three days' uneaten food beside his pallet bed as if
he had spent the three days in a mental balancing of his terrestrial
accounts, found the result and proved it and then turned upon his
contemporary scene of folly and outrage and injustice the dead and
consistent impassivity of a cold and inflexible disapproval. Now Miss
Rosa was not only an orphan, but a pauper too. The store was now just a
shell, the deserted building vacated even by rats and containing nothing
, not even goodwill since he had irrevocably estranged himself from
neighbors town and embattled land all three by his behavior. Even the
two negresses which he had freed as soon as he came into possession of
them (through a debt, by the way, not purchase), writing out their
papers of freedom which they could not read and putting them on a weekly
wage which he held back in full against the discharge of the current
market value at which he had assumed them on the debtiand in return for
which they had been among the first Jefferson negroes to desert and
follow the Yankee troopsiwere gone now. So when he died, he had nothing,
not only saved but kept. Doubtless the only pleasure which he had ever
had was not in the meagre spartan hoard which he had accumulated before
his path crossed that of his future soniinilaw; snot in the money but in
its representation of a balance in whatever spiritual countingihouse he
believed would some day pay his sight drafts on selfidenial and
fortitude. And doubtless what hurt him most in the whole business with
Sutpen was not the loss of the money but the fact that he had had to
sacrifice the hoarding, the symbol of the fortitude and abnegation, to
keep intact the spiritual solvency which he believed that he had already
established and secured. It was as if he had had to pay the same note
twice because of some trifling oversight of date or signature. So Miss
Rosa was both pauper and orphan, with no kin above dust but Judith and
the aunt who had been last heard of two years ago while trying to pass
the Yankee lines to reach Illinois and so be near the Rock Island prison
where her husband, who had offered his talents for horses and
muleigetting to the Confederate cavalry remount corps and had been
caught at it, now was. Ellen was dead two years nowithe butterfly, 66

Page 64

the moth caught in a gale and blown against a wall and clinging there
beating feebly, not with any particular stubborn clinging to life, not
in particular pain since it was too light to have struck hard, nor even
with very much rememberance of the bright vacuum before the gale, but
just in bewildered and uncomprehending amazementithe bright trivial
shell not even to any great extent changed despite the year of bad food,
since all of Sutpen's negroes had deserted also to follow the Yankee
troops away; the wild blood which he had brought into the country and
tried to mix, blend, with the tame which was already there, with the
same care and for the same purpose with which he blended that of the
stallion and that of his own. And with the same success: as though his
presence alone compelled that house to accept and retain human life; as
though houses actually possess a sentience, a personality and character
acquired not from the people who breathe or have breathed in them so
much as rather inherent in the wood and brick or begotten upon the wood
and brick by the man or men who conceived and built them* in this one an
incontrovertible affirmation for emptiness, desertion; an insurmountable
resistance to occupancy save when sanctioned and protected by the
ruthless and the strong. She had lost some flesh of course, but it was
as the butterfly itself enters dissolution by actually dissolving: the
area of wing and body decreasing a little, the pattern of the spots
drawing a little closer together, but with no wrinkle to showithe same
smooth, almost girlish face on the pillow (though Miss Rosa now
discovered that Ellen had been dyeing her hair evidently for years), the
same almost plump soft (though now unringed) hands on the coverlet, and
only the bafflement in the dark uncomprehending eyes to indicate
anything of present life by which to postulate approaching death as she
asked the seventeeniyeariold sister (Henry up to now was just vanished,
his birthright voluntarily repudiated; he had not yet returned to play
his final part in his family's doomiand this, your grandfather said,
spared Ellen too, not that it would have been the crushing and crowning
blow but that it would have been wasted on her since the clinging moth,
even alive, would have been incapable now of feeling anymore of wind or
violence) to protect the remaining child. So the natural thing would
have been for her to go out and live with Judith, the natural thing for
her or any Southern woman, gentlewoman. She would not have needed 67

Page 65

to be asked; no one would expect her to wait to be. Because that's what

a Southern lady is. Not the fact that, penniless and with no prospect of
ever being otherwise and knowing that all who know her know this, yet

moving with a parasol and a private chamber pot and three trunks into
your home and into the room where your wife uses the handiembroidered

linen and not only said, told, doubtless unaware, such was her existence
then, that she did not know where her husband had gone and not even

conscious that she was not curious, and no one but your
perhaps Clytie ever to know that Sutpen had gone to New
They would enter that dim grim tight little house where
four years, the aunt still seemed to be just beyond any

grandfather and
Orleans too.
even yet, after
door with her

hand already on the knob and which Ellen would fill with ten or fifteen
minutes of shrill uproar and then depart, taking with her the dreamy and

volitionless daughter who had not spoken one word; and Miss Rosa who in

actual fact was the girl's aunt and who by actual years

should have been

her sister and who in actual experience and hope and opportunity should
have been the niece, ignoring the mother to follow the departing and

inaccessible daughter with myopic and inarticulate yearning and not one
whit of jealousy, projecting upon Judith all the abortive dreams and 55

Page 66

to tell her. Because Judith knew. She may have known for some time; even
Ellen may have known, only probably to Ellen at that time absence was
not a qualitative state, absence into ignominy or into oblivion being
identical, and so it may not have occurred to Ellen either to tell her
sister, that to another the uncertainty of battle and the certainty of
oblivion might be two things. Or perhaps Judith never told her mother
either. Perhaps Ellen did not know before she died that Henry and Bon
were now privates in the company which their classmates at the
University had organised. Miss Rosa did not know it at all. The first
intimation she had had in four years that her nephew was still alive was
the afternoon when Wash Jones, riding Sutpen's remaining mule, stopped
in front of the house and began to shout her name. She had seen him
before but she did not recognise himia gaunt gangling man malariai
ridden with pale eyes and a face that might have been any age between
twentyifive and sixty, sitting on the saddleless mule in the street
before the gate, shouting "Hello. Hello." at intervals until she came to
the door; whereupon he lowered his voice somewhat, though not much. "Air
you Rosie Coldfield?" he said.

Page 67

t was still not dark enough for Quentin to start, not yet dark enough to
suit Miss Coldfield at least, even discounting the twelve miles out
there and the twelve miles back. Quentin knew that. He could almost see
her, waiting in one of the dark airless rooms in the little grim house's
impregnable solitude. She would have no light burning because she would
be out of the house soon, and probably some mental descendant or kinsman
of him or her who had told her once that light and moving air carried
heat had also told her that the cost of electricity was not in the
actual time the light burned but in the retroactive overcoming of
primary inertia when the switch was snapped: that that was what showed
on the meter. She would be wearing already the black bonnet with jet
sequins; he knew that: and a shawl, sitting there in the augmenting and
defunctive twilight; she would have even now in her hand or on her lap
the reticule with all the keys, entrance closet and cupboard, that the
house possessed which she was about to desert for perhaps six hours; and
a parasol, an umbrella too, he thought, thinking how she would be
impervious to weather and season since although he had not spoken a
hundred words to her in his life before this afternoon, he did know that
she had never before tonight quitted that house after sundown save on
Sundays and Wednesdays for prayer meeting, in the entire fortyithree
years probably. Yes, she would have the umbrella. She would emerge with
it when he called for her and carry it invincibly into the spent 70

Page 68

suspiration of an evening without even dew, where even now the only
alteration toward darkness was in the soft and fuller random of the
firefliesia fuller and more profound random in the twilight following
sixty days without rain and fortyitwo without even dewibelow the gallery
where he rose from his chair as Mr Compson, carrying the letter, emerged
from the house, snapping on the porch light as he passed. "You will
probably have to go inside to read it," Mr Compson said. "Maybe I can
read it here all right," Quentin said. "Perhaps you are right," Mr
Compson said. "Maybe even the light of day, let alone this*" he
indicated the single globe stained and bugifouled from the long summer
and which even when clean gave off but little light "which man had to
invent to his need since, relieved of the onus of sweating to live, he
is apparently reverting (or evolving) back into a nocturnal animal,
would be too much for it, for them. Yes, for them: of that day and time,
of a dead time; people too as we are and victims too as we are, but
victims of a different circumstance, simpler and therefore, integer for
integer, larger, more heroic and the figures therefore more heroic too,
not dwarfed and involved but distinct, uncomplex who had the gift of
loving once or dying once instead of being diffused and scattered
creatures drawn blindly limb from limb from a grab bag and assembled,
author and victim too of a thousand homicides and a thousand copulations
and divorcements. Perhaps you are right. Perhaps any more light than
this would be too much for it." But he did not give Quentin the letter
at once. He sat again, Quentin sitting again too, and took up the cigar
from the veranda rail, the coal glowing again, the wistaria colored
smoke drifting again unwinded across Quentin's face as Mr Compson raised
his feet once more to the railing, the letter in his hand and the hand
looking almost as dark as a negro's against his linen leg. "Because
Henry loved Bon. He repudiated blood birthright and material security
for his sake, for the sake of this man who was at least an intending
bigamist even if not an out and out blackguard, and on whose dead body
four years later Judith was to find the photograph of the other woman
and the child. So much so that he (Henry) could give his father the lie
about a statement which he must have realised that his father could not
and would not have made without foundation and proof. Yet he did it,
Henry himself striking the blow with his own 7

Page 69

hand, even though he must have known that what his father told him about
the woman and the child was true. He must have said to himself, must
have said when he closed the library door for the last time behind
himself that Christmas eve and must have repeated while he and Bon rode
side by side through the iron dark of that Christmas morning, away from
the house where he had been born and which he would see but one time
more and that with the fresh blood of the man who now rode beside him,
on his hands: I will believe; I will. I will. Even i f it is so, even i
f what my father told me is true and which, in spite of myself, I cannot
keep from knowing is true, I will still believe. Because what else could
he have hoped to find in New Orleans, if not the truth, if not what his
father had told him, what he had denied and refused to accept even could
have hoped. 'Judith? Isn't she in bed?â " 'Dont lie to me, Thomas,â
Ellen said. 'I can understand your bringing Henry here to see this,
wanting Henry to see this; I will try to understand it; yes, I will make
myself try to understand it. But not Judith, Thomas. Not my baby girl,
Thomas.â "'I dont expect you to understand it,' he said. 'Because you
are a woman. But I didn't bring Judith down here. I would not bring her
down here. I dont expect you to believe that. But I swear to it.' 2 l

Page 70

as a valid objection to marriage with a white womania situation in which
probably all his contemporaries who could afford it were likewise
involved and which it would no more have occurred to him to mention to
his bride or wife or to her family than he would have told them the
secrets of a fraternal organization which he had joined before he
married . In fact, the manner in which his intended bride's family
reacted to the discovery of it was doubtless the first and last time
when the Sutpen family ever surprised him. He is the curious one to me.
He came into that isolated puritan country household almost like Sutpen
himself came into Jefferson: apparently complete, without background or
past or childhoodia man a little older than his actual years and
enclosed and surrounded by a sort of Scythian glitter, who seems to have
seduced the country brother and sister without any effort or particular
desire to do so, who caused all the pother and uproar yet from the
moment when he realised that Sutpen was going to prevent the marriage if
he could, he (Bon) seems to have withdrawn into a mere spectator,
passive, a little sardonic, and completely enigmatic. He seems to hover,
shadowy, almost substanceless, a little behind and above all the other
straightforward and logical even though (to him) incomprehensible
ultimatums and affirmations and defiances and challenges and
repudiations, with an air of sardonic and indolent detachment like that
of a youthful Roman consul making the Grand Tour of his day among the
barbarian hordes which his grandfather conquered, benighted in a
brawling and childish and quite deadly mudicastle household in a miasmic
and spiritiridden forest. It was as if he found the whole business, not
inexplicable of course, just unnecessary; that he knew at once that
Sutpen had found out about the mistress and child and he now found
Sutpen's action and Henry's reaction a fetichiridden moral blundering
which did not deserve to be called thinking, which he contemplated with
the detached attentiveness of a scientist watching the muscles in an
anesthetised frog; watching, contemplating them from behind that barrier
of sophistication in comparison with which Henry and Sutpen were
troglodytes. Not just the outside, the way he walked and talked and wore
his clothes and handed Ellen into the dining room or into the carriage
and (perhaps, probably) kissed her hand and which Ellen envied for
Henry, but the man himself *that fatalistic and impenetrable
imperturbability with which he 74

Page 71

watched them while he waited for them to do whatever it would be that
they would do, as if he had known all the while that the occasion would
arise when he would have to wait and that all he would need to do would
be to wait; that he had seduced Henry and Judith both too thoroughly to
have any fear that he might not marry Judith when he wished to. Not that
stupid shrewdness half instinct and half belief in luck, and half
muscular habit of the senses and nerves of the gambler waiting to take
what he can from what he sees, but a certain reserved and inflexible
pessimism stripped long generations ago of all the rubbish and claptrap
of people (yes, Sutpen and Henry and the Coldfields too) who have not
quite yet emerged from barbarism, who two thousand years hence will
still be throwing triumphantly off the yoke of Latin culture and
intelligence of which they were never in any great permanent danger to
begin with. "Because he loved Judith. He would have added doubtless
âafter his fashion' since, as his intended fatheriinilaw soon learned,
this was not the first time he had played this part, pledged what he had
pledged to Judith, let alone the first time he would have gone through a
ceremony to commemorate it, make what distinction (he was a Catholic of
sorts) he might between this one with a white woman and that other.
Because you will see the letter, not the first one he ever wrote to her
but at least the first, the only one she ever showed, as your
grandmother knew then: and, so we believe, now that she is dead, the
only one which she kept unless of course Miss Rosa or Clytie destroyed
the others after she herself died: and this one here preserved not
because Judith put it away to keep but because she brought it herself
and gave it to your grandmother after Bon's death, possibly on the same
day when she destroyed the others which he had written her (provided of
course it was she herself who destroyed them) which would have been when
she found in Bon's coat the picture of the octoroon mistress and the
little boy. Because he was her first and last sweetheart. She must have
seen him in fact with exactly the same eyes that Henry saw him with. And
it would be hard to say to which of them he appeared the more splendid
*to the one with hope, even though unconscious, of making the image hers
through possession; to the other with the knowledge, even though
subconscious to the desire, of the insurmountable barrier which the 75

Page 72

similarity of gender hopelessly intervened; this man whom Henry first
saw riding perhaps through the grove at the University on one of the two
horses which he kept there or perhaps crossing the campus on foot in the
slightly Frenchified cloak and hat which he wore, or perhaps (I like to
think this) presented formally to the man reclining in a flowered,
almost feminised gown, in a sunny window in his chambersithis man
handsome elegant and even catlike and too old to be where he was, too
old not in years but in experience, with some tangible effluvium of
knowledge, surfeit: of actions done and satiations plumbed and pleasures
exhausted and even forgotten. So that he must have appeared, not only to
Henry but to the entire undergraduate body of that small new provincial
college, as a source not of envy because you only envy whom you believe
to be, but for accident, in no way superior to yourself: and what you
believe, granted a little better luck than you have had heretofore, you
will someday possess; not of envy but of despair: that sharp shocking
terrible hopeless despair of the young which sometimes takes the form of
insult toward and even physical assault upon the human subject of it or,
in extreme cases like Henry's, insult toward and assault upon any and
all detractors of the subject, as witness Henry's violent repudiation of
his father and his birthright when Sutpen forbade the marriage. Yes, he
loved Bon, who seduced him as surely as he seduced Judithi the country
boy born and bred who, with the five or six others of that small
undergraduate body composed of other planters' sons whom Bon permitted
to become intimate with him, who aped his clothing and manner and (to
the extent which they were able) his very manner of living, looked upon
Bon as though he were a hero out of some adolescent Arabian Nights who
had stumbled upon (or rather, had thrust upon him) a talisman or
touchstone not to invest him with wisdom or power or wealth, but with
the ability and opportunity to pass from the scene of one scarce
imaginable delight to the next one without interval or pause or satiety;
and the very fact that, lounging before them in the outlandish and
almost feminine garments of his sybaritic privacy, he professed satiety
but increased not only the amazement but the bitter and hopeless
outrage; Henry, the provincial, the clown almost, given to instinctive
and violent action rather than to thinking, ratiocination, who may have
been conscious that his fierce provincial's pride in his 76

Page 73

sister's virginity was a false quantity which must incorporate in itself
an inability to endure in order to be precious, to exist, and so must
depend upon its loss, absence, to have existed at all. In fact, perhaps
this is the pure and perfect incest: the brother realising that the
sister's virginity must be destroyed in order to have existed at all,
taking that virginity in the person of the brotheriinilaw, the man whom
he would be if he could become, metamorphose into, the lover, the
husband; by whom he would be despoiled, choose for despoiler, if he
could become, metamorphose into the sister, the mistress, the bride.
Perhaps that is what went on, not in Henry's mind but in his soul.
Because he never thought. He felt, and acted immediately. He knew
loyalty and acted it, he knew pride and jealousy; he loved grieved and
killed, still grieving and, I believe, still loving Bon, the man to whom
he gave four years of probation, four years in which to renounce and
dissolve the other marriage, knowing that the four years of hoping and
waiting would be in vain. "Yes, Henry: not Bon, as witness the entire
queerly placid course of Bon's and Judith's courtshipian engagement, if
engagement it ever was, lasting for a whole year yet comprising two
holiday visits as her brother's guest and which periods Bon seems to
have spent either in riding and hunting with Henry or as acting as an
elegant and indolent esoteric hothouse bloom possessing merely the name
of a city for origin history and past, about which Ellen preened and
fluttered out her unwitting butterfly's Indian summer; he, the living
man, was usurped, you see. There was no time, no interval, no niche in
the crowded days when he could have courted Judith. You can not even
imagine him and Judith alone together. Try to do it and the nearest you
can come is a projection of them while the two actual people were
doubtless separate and elsewhereitwo shades pacing, serene and
untroubled by flesh, in a summer gardenithe same two serene phantoms who
seem to watch, hover, impartial attentive and quiet, above and behind
the inexplicable thunderhead of interdictions and defiances and
repudiations out of which the rocklike Sutpen and the volatile and
violent Henry flashed and glared and ceased; Henry who up to that time
had never even been to Memphis, who had never been away from home before
that September when he went to the University with his countrified
clothes and his saddle horse and negro groom; the six or seven of them,
of an age and 77

Page 74

Apparently he paid Judith the dubious compliment of not even trying to
ruin her, let alone insisting on the marriage either before or after
Sutpen forbade itithis, mind you, in a man who had already acquired a
name for prowess among women while at the University, long before Sutpen
was to find actual proof. No engagement, no courtship even: he and
Judith saw one another three times in two years, for a total period of
twelve days, counting the time which Ellen 78

Page 75

consumed; they parted without even saying goodbye. And yet, four years
later, Henry had to kill Bon to keep them from marrying. So it must have
been Henry who seduced Judith, not Bon: seduced her along with himself
from that distance between Oxford and Sutpen's Hundred, between herself
and the man whom she had not even seen yet, as though by means of that
telepathy with which as children they seemed at times to anticipate one
another's actions as two birds leave a limb at the same instant; that
rapport not like the conventional delusion of that between twins but
rather such as might exist between two people who, regardless of sex or
age or heritage of race or tongue, had been marooned at birth on a
desert island: the island here Sutpen's Hundred; the solitude, the
shadow of that father with whom not only the town but their mother's
family as well had merely assumed armistice rather than accepting and
assimilating. "You see? there they are: this girl, this young
countrybred girl who sees a man for an average of one hour a day for
twelve days during his life and that over a period of a year and a half,
yet is bent on marrying him to the extent of forcing her brother to the
last resort of homicide, even if not murder, to prevent it and that
after a period of four years during which she could not have been always
certain that he was still alive; this father who should see that man one
time, yet have reason to make a six hundred mile journey to investigate
him and either discover what he already and apparently by clairvoyance
suspected, or at least something which served just as well as reason for
forbidding the marriage ; this brother in whose eyes that sister's and
daughter's honor and happiness, granted that curious and unusual
relationship which existed between them, should have been more jealous
and precious than to the father even, yet who must champion the marriage
to the extent of repudiating father and blood and home to become a
follower and dependent of the rejected suitor for four years before
killing him apparently for the very identical reason which four years
ago he quitted home to champion; and this lover who apparently without
volition or desire became involved in an engagement which he seems
neither to have sought nor avoided, who took his dismissal in the same
passive and sardonic spirit, yet four years later was apparently so bent
upon the marriage to which up to that time he had been completely
indifferent 79

Page 76

not let him; it was the probation, you see) when she received a letter
from him saying We have waited long enough, she and Clytie should begin
at once to fashion a wedding dress and veil out of rags and scraps;
Ellen, the esoteric, the almost baroque, the almost epicene objet d'art
which with childlike voracity she essayed to include in the furnishing
and decoration of her house; Sutpen, the man whom, after seeing once and
before any engagement existed anywhere save in his wife's mind, he saw
as a potential threat to the (now and at last) triumphant coronation of
his old hardships and ambition, of which threat he was apparently sure
enough to warrant a six hundred mile journey to prove itithis in a man
who might have challenged and shot someone whom he disliked or feared
but who would not have made even a ten mile journey to investigate him.
You see? You would almost believe that Sutpen's trip to New Orleans was
just sheer chance, just a little more of the illogical machinations of a
fatality which had chosen that family in preference to any other in the
county or the land exactly as a small boy chooses one antihill to pour
boiling water into in preference to any other, not even himself knowing
why. They stayed two weeks and rode back to school, stopping to see Miss
Rosa but she was not at home; they passed the long term before the
summer vacation talking together and riding and reading (Bon was reading
law. He would be, would almost have to, since only that could have made
his residence bearable, regardless of what reason he may have brought
with him for remaining; this, the perfect setting for his dilatory
indolence: this digging into musty Blackstone and Coke where, of an
undergraduate body still numbered in two figures, the law school
probably consisted of six others beside Henryiyes, he corrupted Henry to
the law also; Henry changed in midtermiand himself) while Henry aped his
clothing and speech, caricatured rather, perhaps, and Bon, though he had
now seen Judith, very likely the same lazy and catlike man and it Henry
who foisted upon him now the role of his sister's intended as during the
fall term Henry and his companions had foisted upon Bon the role of
Lothario; and Ellen and Judith now shopping two and three times a week
in town and stopping once to see Miss Rosa while on their way by
carriage to Memphis, with a wagon preceding them to fetch back the
plunder and an extra nigger on the box with 81

Page 77

the coachman to stop every few miles and build a fire and reiheat the
bricks on which Ellen's and Judith's feet rested, shopping, buying the
trousseau for that wedding whose formal engagement existed no where yet
save in Ellen's mind; and Sutpen, who had seen Bon once and was in New
Orleans investigating him when Bon next entered the house: who knows
what he was thinking, what waiting for, what moment, day, to go to New
Orleans and find what he seems to have known all the while that he would
find? There was no one for him to tell, talk to about it, about his fear
and suspicion. He trusted no man nor woman, who had no man's nor woman's
love, since Ellen was incapable of love and Judith was too much like him
and he must have seen at a glance that Bon, even though the daughter
might still be saved from him, had already corrupted the son. He had
been too successful, you see; his was that solitude of contempt and
distrust which success brings to him who gained it because he was strong
instead of merely lucky. "Then June came and the end of the school year
and Henry and Bon returned to Sutpen's Hundred, Bon to spend a day or
two before riding on to the River to take the steamboat home, to New
Orleans where Sutpen had already gone though none knew it, least of all
Ellen. He stayed but two days, yet now if ever was his chance to come to
an understanding with Judith, perhaps even to fall in love with her. It
was his only chance, his last chance, though of course neither he nor
Judith could have known it, since Sutpen, though but two weeks absent
from home, had doubtless already found out about the octoroon mistress
and the child. So for the first and last time Bon and Judith might have
been said to have a free fieldimight have been, since it was really
Ellen who had the free field. I can imagine her engineering that
courtship, supplying Judith and Bon with opportunities for trysts and
pledges with a coy and unflagging ubiquity which they must have tried in
vain to evade and escape, Judith with annoyed yet still serene concern,
Bon with that sardonic and surprised distaste which seems to have been
the ordinary manifestation of the impenetrable and shadowy character.
Yes, shadowy : a myth, a phantom: something which they engendered and
created whole themselves; some effluvium of Sutpen blood and character,
as though as a man he did not exist at all. Yet there was the body which
8z

Page 78

Henry met again at the University; the lettersifrom Henry and Bon both
nowimaking weekly journeys by the hand of Henry's groom; and Sutpen
still waiting, certainly no one could say for what now, incredible that
he should wait for Christmas, for the crisis to come to himithis man of
whom it was said that he not only went out to meet his troubles, he
sometimes went out and manufactured them. But this time he waited and it
came to him: Christmas, and Henry and Bon rode again to Sutpen's Hundred
and even the town convinced now by Ellen that the engagement existed;
that twentyifourth of December, i860, and the nigger children, with
branches of mistletoe and holly for excuses, already lurking about the
rear of the big house to shout âChristmas gift' at the white people, the
rich city man come to court Judith, and Sutpen saying nothing even yet,
not suspected yet unless possibly by Henry, possibly Henry who brought
the matter to its crisis that same night, and Ellen at the absolute
flood's peak of her unreal and weightless life which with the next dawn
was to break beneath her and wash her, spent amazed and uncomprehending,
into the shuttered room where she died two years later; the Christmas
eve, the explosion, and none to ever know just why or just what happened
between Henry and his father and only the cabinitoicabin whispering of
negroes to spread the news that Henry and Bon had ridden away in the
dark and that Henry had formally abjured his home and birthright. "They
went to New Orleans. They rode through the bright cold of that Christmas
day, to the River and took the steamboat, it still Henry doing the
leading, the bringing, as he always did until the very last, when for
the first time during their entire relationship Bon led and Henry
followed. He didn't have to go. He had voluntarily made himself a pauper
but he could have gone to his grandfather since although he was probably
better mounted than any other at the University, not excepting Bon
himself, he probably had very little money beyond what he could raise
hurriedly on his horse and what valuables he happened to have on his
body when he and Bon rode away. No, he didn't have to go, and he doing
the leading this time too, and Bon riding beside him trying to find out
from him what had happened. Bon knew of course what Sutpen had
discovered in New Orleans, but he would need to know just what, just how
much, Sutpen had told Henry, and Henry not telling him, doubtless 84

Page 79

with the new mare which he probably knew he would have to surrender,
sacrifice too, along with all the rest of his life, inheritance, going
fast now and his back rigid and irrevocably turned upon the house, his
birthplace and all the familiar scenes of his childhood and youth which
he had repudiated for the sake of that friend with whom, despite the
sacrifice which he had just made out of love and loyalty, he still could
not be perfectly frank. Because he knew that what Sutpen had told him
was true. He must have known that at the very instant when he gave his
father the lie. So he dared not ask Bon to deny it; he dared not, you
see. He could face poverty, disinheritance, but he could not have borne
that lie from Bon. Yet he went to New Orleans. He went straight there,
to the only place, the very place, where he could not help but prove
conclusively the very statement which, coming from his father, he had
called a lie. He went there for that purpose; he went there to prove it.
And Bon, riding beside him, trying to find out what Sutpen had told
him,7Bon who for a year and a half now had been watching Henry ape his
clothing and speech, who for a year and a half now had seen himself as
the object of that complete and abnegant devotion which only a youth,
never a woman, gives to another youth or a man; who for exactly a year
now had seen the sister succumb to that same spell which the brother had
already succumbed to, and this with no volition on the seducer's part,
without so much as the lifting of a finger, as though it actually were
the brother who had put the spell on the sister, seduced her to his own
vicarious image which walked and breathed with Bon's body. Yet here is
the letter, sent four years afterward, written on a sheet of paper
salvaged from a gutted house in Carolina, with stove polish found in
some captured Yankee stores; four years after she had had any message
from him save the messages from Henry that he (Bon) was still alive. So
whether Henry now knew about the other woman or not, he would now have
to know. Bon realised that. I can imagine them as they rode, Henry still
in the fierce repercussive flush of vindicated loyalty, and Bon, the
wiser, the shrewder even if only from wider experience and a few more
years of age, learning from Henry without Henry's being aware of it,
what Sutpen had told him. Because Henry would have to know now. And I
dont believe it was just to preserve Henry as an ally, for the crisis of
some future need. It was because Bon not only loved Judith after 85

Page 80

his fashion but he loved Henry too and I believe in a deeper sense than
merely after his fashion. Perhaps in his fatalism he loved Henry the
better of the two, seeing perhaps in the sister merely the shadow, the
woman vessel with which to consummate the love whose actual object was
the youthzithis cerebral Don Juan who, reversing the order, had learned
to love what he had injured; perhaps it was even more than Judith or
Henry either: perhaps the life, the existence, which they represented.
Because who knows what picture of peace he might have seen in that
monotonous provincial backwater; what alleviation and escape for a
parched traveller who had travelled too far at too young an age, in this
graniteibound and simple country spring. "And I can imagine how Bon told
Henry, broke it to him. I can imagine Henry in New Orleans, who had not
yet even been to Memphis, whose entire worldly experience consisted of
sojourns at other houses, plantations, almost interchangeable with his
own, where he followed the same routine which he did at homeithe same
hunting and cockfighting , the same amateur racing of horses on crude
homemade tracks, horses sound enough in blood and lineage yet not bred
to race and perhaps not even thirty minutes out of the shafts of a trap
or perhaps even a carriage; the same square dancing with identical and
also interchangeable provincial virgins, to music exactly like that at
home, the same champagne, the best doubtless yet crudely dispensed out
of the burlesqued pantomime elegance of negro butlers who (and likewise
the drinkers who gulped it down like neat whiskey between flowery and
unsubtle toasts) would have treated lemonade the same way. I can imagine
him, with his puritan heritageithat heritage peculiarly Angloi Saxoniof
fierce proud mysticism and that ability to be ashamed of ignorance and
inexperience, in that city foreign and paradoxical, with its atmosphere
at once fatal and languorous, at once feminine and steelihardithis grim
humorless yokel out of a granite heritage where even the houses, let
alone clothing and conduct, are built in the image of a jealous and
sadistic Jehovah, put suddenly down in a place whose denizens had
created their AlliPowerful and His supporting hierarchyi chorus of
beautiful saints and handsome angels in the image of their houses and
personal ornaments and voluptuous lives. Yes, I can imagine how Bon led
up to it, to the shock: the skill, the calculation, preparing 86

Page 81

Henry's puritan mind as he would have prepared a cramped and rocky field
and planted it and raised the crop which he wanted. It would be the fact
of the ceremony, regardless of what kind, that Henry would balk at: Bon
knew this. It would not be the mistress or even the child, not even the
negro mistress and even less the child because of that fact, since Henry
and Judith had grown up with a negro half sister of their own; not the
mistress to Henry, certainly not the nigger mistress to a youth with
Henry's background, a young man grown up and living in a milieu where
the other sex is separated into three sharp divisions, separated (two of
them) by a chasm which could be crossed but one time and in but one
directioniladies, women, femalesithe virgins whom gentlemen someday
married, the courtesans to whom they went while on sabbaticals to the
cities, the slave girls and women upon whom that first caste rested and
to whom in certain cases it doubtless owed the very fact of its
virginity; not this to Henry, young, strongiblooded, victim of the hard
celibacy of riding and hunting to heat and make importunate the blood of
a young man, to which he and his kind were forced to pass time away,
with girls of his own class interdict and inaccessible and women of the
second class just as inaccessible because of money and distance, and
hence only the slave girls, the housemaids neated and cleaned by white
mistresses or perhaps girls with sweating bodies out of the fields
themselves and the young man rides up and beckons the watching overseer
and says Send me Juno or Missylena or Chlory and then rides on into the
trees and dismounts and waits. No: it would be the ceremony , a ceremony
entered into, to be sure, with a negro, yet still a ceremony; this is
what Bon doubtless thought. So I can imagine him, the way he did it: the
way in which he took the innocent and negative plate of Henry's
provincial soul and intellect and exposed it by slow degrees to this
esoteric milieu, building gradually toward the picture which he desired
it to retain, accept. I can see him corrupting Henry gradually into the
purlieus of elegance, with no foreword, no warning, the postulation to
come after the fact, exposing Henry slowly to the surface aspectithe
architecture a little curious, a little femininely flamboyant and
therefore to Henry opulent, sensuous, sinful; the inference of great and
easy wealth measured by steamboat loads in place of a tedious inching of
sweating human figures across cotton fields; the flash 87

Page 82

and glitter of a myriad carriage wheels, in a little brighter and in
broadcloth a little trimmer and with hats raked a little more above
faces a little more darkly swaggering than any Henry had ever seen
before: and the mentor, the man for whose sake he had repudiated not
only blood and kin but food and shelter and clothing too, whose clothing
and walk and speech he had tried to ape, along with his attitude toward
women and his ideas of honor and pride too, watching him with that cold
and catlike inscrutable calculation, watching the picture resolve and
become fixed and then telling Henry, âBut that's not it. That's just the
base, the foundation. It can belong to anyone': and Henry, âYou mean,
this is not it? That it is above this, higher than this, more select
than this?': and Bon, âYes. This is only the foundation. This belongs to
anybody.': a dialogue without words, speech, which would fix and then
remove without obliterating one line the picture, this background,
leaving the background, the plate prepared and innocent again: the plate
docile, with that puritan's humility toward anything which is a matter
of sense rather than logic, fact, the man, the struggling and
suffocating heart behind it saying I will believe! I will! I will!
Whether it is true or not, I will believe! waiting for the next picture
which the mentor, the corruptor, intended for it: that next picture,
following the fixation and acceptance of which the mentor would say
again, perhaps with words now, still watching the sober and thoughtful
face but still secure in his knowledge and trust in that puritan
heritage which must show disapproval instead of surprise or even despair
and nothing at all rather than have the disapprobation construed as
surprise or despair: âBut even this is not it': and Henry, âYou mean, it
is still higher than this, ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 83

casuallyithis, corruption subtly anew by putting into Henry's mind the
notion of one man of the world speaking to another, that Henry knew that
Bon believed that Henry would know even from a disjointed word what Bon
was talking about, and Henry the puritan who must show nothing at all
rather than surprise or incomprehension; 7a facade shuttered and blank,
drowsing in steamy morning sunlight, invested by the bland and cryptic
voice with something of secret and curious and unimaginable delights.
Without his knowing what he saw it was as though to Henry ..ERR,
COD:l..

Page 84

closed behind them instead of before, no sight or evidence above the
high thick walls of the low city and scarce any sound of it, the
labyrinthine mass of oleander and jasmine, lantana and mimosa walling
yet again the strip of bare earth combed and curried with powdered
shell, raked and immaculate and only the most recent of the brown stains
showing now, and the voiceithe mentor, the guide standing aside now to
watch the grave provincial faceicasually and pleasantly anecdotal: âThe
customary way is to stand back to back, the pistol in your right hand
and the corner of the other cloak in your left. Then at the signal you
begin to walk and when you feel the cloak tauten you turn and fire.
Though there are some now and then, when the blood is especially hot or
when it is still peasant blood, who prefer knives and one cloak. They
face one another inside the same cloak, you see, each holding the
other's wrist with the left hand. But that was never my way';*casual,
chatty, you see, waiting for the countryman's slow question, who knew
already now before he asked it: âWhat would youithey be fighting for?â
"Yes, Henry would know now, or believe that he knew now; anymore he
would probably consider antiiclimax though it would not be, it would be
anything but that, the final blow, stroke, touch, the keen surgeonlike
compounding which the now shocked nerves of the patient would not even
feel, not know that the first hard shocks were the random and crude.
Because there was that ceremony. Bon knew that that would be what Henry
would resist, find hard to stomach and retain. Oh he was shrewd, this
man whom for weeks now Henry was realising that he knew less and less,
this stranger immersed and oblivious now in the formal, almost ritual,
preparations for the visit, finicking almost like a woman over the fit
of the new coat which he would have ordered for Henry, forced Henry to
accept for this occasion, by means of which the entire impression which
Henry was to receive from the visit would be established before they
even left the house, before Henry ever saw the woman: and Henry, the
countryman, the bewildered, with the subtle tide already setting beneath
him toward the point where he must either betray himself and his entire
upbringing and thinking, or deny the friend for whom he had already
repudiated home and kin and all; the bewildered , the (for that time)
helpless, who wanted to believe yet did not see how he could, being
carried by the friend, the mentor, through one 90

Page 85

of those inscrutable and curiously lifeless doorways like that before
which he had seen the horse or the trap, and so into a place which to
his puritan's provincial mind all of morality was upside down and all of
honor perishedia place created for and by voluptuousness, the abashless
and unabashed senses, and the country boy with his simple and erstwhile
untroubled code in which females were ladies or whores or slaves looked
at the apotheosis of two doomed races presided over by its own victimia
woman with a face like a tragic magnolia, the eternal female, the
eternal Whoâsuffers; the child, the boy, sleeping in silk and lace to be
sure yet complete chattel of him who, begetting him, owned him body and
soul to sell (if he chose) like a calf or puppy or sheep; and the mentor
watching again, perhaps even the gambler now thinking Have I won or
lost? as they emerged and returned to Bon's rooms, for that while
impotent even with talk, shrewdness, no longer counting upon that
puritan character which must show neither surprise nor despair , having
to count now (if on anything) on the corruption itself, the love; he
could not even say, 'Well? What do you say about it?â He could only
wait, and that upon the absolutely unpredictable actions of a man who
lived by instinct and not reason, until Henry should speak, 'But a
bought woman. A whore': and Bon, even gently now, 'Not whore. Dont say
that. In fact, never refer to one of them by that name in New Orleans:
otherwise you may be forced to purchase that privilege with some of your
blood from probably a thousand men', and perhaps still gently, perhaps
now even with something of pity: that pessimistic and sardonic cerebral
pity of the intelligent for any human injustice or folly or suffering:
'Not whores. And not whores because of us, the thousand. Weithe
thousand, the white menimade them, created and produced them; we even
made the laws which declare that one eighth of a specified kind of blood
shall outweigh seven eighths of another kind. I admit that. But that
same white race would have made them slaves too, laborers, cooks, maybe
even field hands, if it were not for this thousand, these few men like
myself without principles or honor either, perhaps you will say. We
cannot, perhaps we do not even want to, save all of them; perhaps the
thousand we save are not one in a thousand. But we save that one. God
may mark every sparrow, but we do not pretend to be God, you see.
Perhaps we do not even want to be God, since no man 91

Page 86

would want but one of these sparrows. And perhaps when God looks into
one of these establishments like you saw tonight, He would not choose
one of us to be God either, now that He is old. Though He must have been
young once, surely He was young once, and surely someone who has existed
as long as He has, who has looked at as much crude and promiscuous
sinning without grace or restraint or decorum as He has had to, to
contemplate at last, even though the instances are not one in a thousand
thousand, the principles of honor, decorum and gentleness applied to
perfectly normal human instinct which you Angl078axons insist upon
calling lust and in whose service you revert in sabbaticals to the
primordial caverns, the be a ghost but nevertheless having to be one for
all that, since he was born and bred in the deep South the same as she
wasithe two separate Quentins now

Page 87

not let the other out of his sight, not from fear that Bon would marry
Judith with Henry not there to stop it, but that Bon would marry Judith
and then he (Henry) would have to live for the rest of his life with the
knowledge that he was glad that he had been so betrayed, with the
coward's joy of surrendering without having been vanquished; the other
for that same reason too, who could not have wanted Judith without Henry
since he must never have doubted but what he could marry Judith when he
wished, in spite of brother and father both, because as I said before,
it was not Judith who was the object of Bon's love or of Henry's
solicitude. She was just the blank shape, the empty vessel in which each
of them strove to preserve, not the illusion of himself nor his illusion
of the other but what each conceived the other to believe him to beithe
man and the youth, seducer and seduced, who had known one another,
seduced and been seduced, victimised in turn each by the other,
conquerer vanquished by his own strength, vanquished conquering by his
own weakness, before Judith came into their joint lives even by so much
as girlname. And who knows? there was the War now; who knows but what
the fatality and the fatality's victims did not both think, hope, that
the War would settle the matter, leave free one of the two
irreconciliables , since it would not be the first time that youth has
taken catastrophe as a direct act of Providence for the sole purpose of
solving a personal problem which youth itself could not solve. "And
Judith: how else to explain her but this way? Surely Bon could not have
corrupted her to fatalism in twelve days, who not only had not tried to
corrupt her to unchastity but not even to defy her father. No: anything
but a fatalist, who was the Sutpen with the ruthless Sutpen code of
taking what it wanted provided it were strong enough, of the two
children as Henry was the Coldfield with the Coldfield cluttering of
morality and rules of right and wrong; who while Henry screamed and
vomited, looked down from the loft that night on the spectacle of Sutpen
fighting halfnaked with one of his halfnaked niggers with the same cold
and attentive interest with which Sutpen would have watched Henry
fighting with a negro boy of his own age and weight. Because she could
not have known the reason for her father's objection to the marriage.
Henry would not have told her, and she would not have asked her father.
Because, even if she had known it, it would have made no 95

Page 88

difference to her. She would have acted as Sutpen would have acted with
anyone who tried to cross him: she would have taken Bon anyway. I can
imagine her if necessary even murdering the other woman. But she
certainly would have made no investigation and then held a moral debate
between what she wanted and what she thought was right. Yet she waited.
She waited four years, with no word from him save through Henry that he
(Bon) was alive, because Henry would not let Bon write her. He would not
have. And Bon would not have tried to. It was the probation, the
durance; they all three accepted it; I dont believe there was ever any
promise between Henry and Bon demanded or offered. But Judith, who could
not have known what happened nor why.*Have you noticed how so often when
we try to reconstruct the causes which lead up to the actions of men and
women, how with a sort of astonishment we find ourselves now and then
reduced to the belief, the only possible belief, that they stemmed from
some of the old virtues? the thief who steals not for greed but for
love, the murderer who kills not out of lust but pity? Judith, giving
implicit trust where she had given love, giving implicit love where she
had derived breath and pride: that true pride, not that false kind which
transforms what it does not at the moment understand into scorn and
outrage and so vents itself in pique and lacerations, but true pride
which can say to itself without abasement I love, I will accept no
substitute; something has happened between him and my father; i f my
father was right, I will never see him again, i f wrong he will come or
send for me; if happy I can be I will, if suffer I must I can. Because
she waited; she made no effort to do anything else; her relations with
her father had not altered one jot; to see them together, Bon might
never have even existedithe same two calm impenetrable faces seen
together in the carriage in town during the next few months after Ellen
took to her bed, between that Christmas day and the day when Sutpen rode
away with his and Sartoris' regiment. They didn't talk, tell one another
anything, you see*Sutpen, what he had learned about Bon; Judith, that
she knew where Bon and Henry now were. They did not need to talk. They
were too much alike. They were as two people become now and then, who
seem to know one another so well or are so much alike that the power,
the need, to communicate by speech atrophies from disuse and,
comprehending without need of the medium 96

Page 89

of ear or intellect, they no longer understand one another's actual
words. So she did not tell him where Henry and Bon were and he did not
discover it until after the University company departed, because Bon and
Henry enrolled and then hid themselves somewhere. They must have; they
must have paused in Oxford only long enough to enroll before riding on,
because no one who knew them either in Oxford or in Jefferson knew that
they were members of the company at the time, which would have been
almost impossible to conceal otherwise. Because now peopleifathers and
mothers and sisters and kin and sweethearts of those young meniwere
coming to Oxford from further away than Jeffersonifamilies with food and
bedding and servants, to bivouac among the families, the houses, of
Oxford itself, to watch the gallant mimic marching and countermarching
of the sons and the brothers, drawn all of them, rich and poor,
aristocrat and redneck, by what is probably the most moving massisight
of all human massiexperience, far more so than the spectacle of so many
virgins going to be sacrificed to some heathen Principle, some
Priapusithe sight of young men, the light quick bones, the bright
gallant deluded blood and flesh dressed in a martial glitter of brass
and plumes, marching away to a battle. And there would be music at
nightifiddle and triangle among the blazing candles, the blowing of
curtains in tall windows on the April darkness, the swing of crinoline
indiscriminate within the circle of plain gray cuff of the soldier or
the banded gold of rank, of an army even if not a war of gentlemen,
where private and colonel called each other by their given names not as
one farmer to another across a halted plow in a field or across a
counter in a store laden with calico and cheese and strap oil, but as
one man to another above the suave powdered shoulders of women, above
the two raised glasses of scuppernong claret or bought champagne; music,
the nightly repetitive last waltz as the days passed and the company
waited to move, the brave trivial glitter against a black night not
catastrophic but merely background, the perennial last scented spring of
youth; and Judith not there and Henry the romantic not there and Bon the
fatalist, hidden somewhere, the watcher and the watched: and the
recurrent floweriladen dawns of that April and May and June filled with
bugles, entering a hundred windows where a hundred still unbrided widows
dreamed virgin unmeditant upon the locks of black or 97

Page 90

tantrum or even hysteria: that his face had been in that carriage all
the time; that it had been Judith, a girl of six, who had instigated and
authorised that negro to make the team run away. Not Henry, mind; not
the boy, which would have been outrageous enough; but Judith, the girl.
As soon as papa and I entered those gates that afternoon and began to go
up the drive toward the house, I could feel it. It was as though
somewhere in that Sunday afternoon's quiet and peace the screams of that
child still existed, lingered, not as sound now but as something for the
skin to hear, the hair on the head to hear. But I did not ask at once. I
was just four then; I sat in the buggy beside papa as I had stood
between him and our aunt before the church on that first Sunday when I
had been dressed to come and see my sister and my nephew and niece for
the first time, looking at the house (I had been inside it before too,
of course, but even when I saw it for the first time that I could
remember I seemed already to know how it was going to look just as I
seemed to know how Ellen and Judith and Henry would look before I saw
them for the time which I always remember as being the first). No, not
asking even then, but just looking at that huge quiet house, saying'What
room is Judith sick in, papa?â with that quiet aptitude of a child for
accepting the inexplicable, though I now know that even then I was
wondering what Judith saw when she came out the door and found the
phaeton instead of the carriage, the tame stableboy instead of the wild
man; what she had seen in that phaeton which looked so innocent to the
rest of usior worse, what she had missed when she saw the phaeton and
began to scream. Yes, a still hot quiet Sunday afternoon like this
afternoon; I remember yet the utter quiet of that house when we that
house when we went in and from which I knew at once that he was absent
without knowing that he would now be in the scuppernong arbor drinking
with Wash Jones. I only knew, as soon as papa and I crossed the
threshold, that he was not there: as though with some almost omniscient
conviction (that same instinctive knowledge which enabled me to tell
Ellen that it was not from him that Judith would need protection)
knowing that he did not need to stay and observe his triumphiand that,
in comparison with what was to be, this one was a mere trivial business
even beneath our notice too. Yes, that quiet darkened room with the
blinds closed and a negro woman I 8

Page 91

years more, writing Judith meanwhile that they were both alive, and that
was all. "And Judith. She lived alone now. Perhaps she had lived alone
ever since that Christmas day last year and then year before last and
then three years and then four years ago, since though Sutpen was gone
now with his and Sartoris' regiment and the negroesithe wild stock with
which he had created Sutpen's Hundredihad followed the first Yankee
troops to pass through Jefferson, she lived in anything but solitude,
what with Ellen in bed in the shuttered room, requiring the unremitting
attention of a child while she waited with that amazed and passive
uncomprehension to die; and she (Judith) and Clytie making and keeping a
kitchen garden of sorts to keep them alive; and Wash Jones, living in
the abandoned and rotting fishing camp in the river bottom which Sutpen
had built after the first womaniElleniientered his house and the last
deer and bear hunter went out of it, where he now permitted Wash and his
daughter and infant granddaughter to live, performing the heavy garden
work and supplying Ellen and Judith and then Judith with fish and game
now and then, even entering the house now who until Sutpen went away had
never approached nearer than the scuppernong arbor behind the kitchen
where on Sunday afternoons he and Sutpen would drink from the demijohn
and the bucket of spring water which Wash fetched from almost a mile
away, Sutpen in the barrel stave hammock talking and Wash squatting
against a post, chortling and guffawing; not solitude and certainly not
idleness: the same impenetrable and serene face, only a little older
now, a little thinner now, which had appeared in town in the carriage
beside her father's within a week after it was learned that her fiance
and her brother had quitted the house in the night and vanished, none
knew why or where and none asked, just as now none asked when she came
to town now, in the madeiover dress which all Southern women now wore,
in the carriage still but drawn now by a mule, a plow mule, soon the
plow mule, and no coachman to drive it either, to put the mule in the
harness and take it out, to join the other women whereithere were
wounded in Jefferson theniin the improvised hospital where (the nurtured
virgin, the supremely and traditionally idle) they cleaned and dressed
the selfifouled 99

Page 92

bodies of strange injured and dead and made lint of the window curtains
and sheets and linen of the houses in which they had been born; none to
ask her about brother and sweetheart while they talked among themselves
of sons and brothers and husbands with tears and grief perhaps but at
least with certainty, knowledge; she waiting too, like Henry and Bon,
not knowing for what, but unlike Henry and Bon, she not even knowing for
why. Then Ellen died, the butterfly of a forgotten summer two years
defunctive nowithe substanceless shell, the shade impervious to any
alteration or dissolution because of its very weightlessness: no body to
be buried: just the shape, the recollection, translated on some peaceful
afternoon without bell or catafalque into that cedar grove, to lie in
powderilight paradox beneath the thousand pounds of marble monument
which Sutpen (Colonel Sutpen now, since Sartoris had been deposed at the
annual election of regimental officers the year before) brought in the
regimental forage wagon from Charleston, South Carolina and set above
the faint grassy depression which Judith told him was Ellen's grave. And
then her grandfather died, starved to death nailed up in his own attic,
and Judith doubtless inviting Miss Rosa to come out to Sutpen's Hundred
to live and Miss Rosa declining, waiting too apparently upon this
letter, this first direct word from Bon in four years and which, a week
after she buried him too beside her mother's tombstone, she brought to
town herself, in the surrey drawn by the mule which both she and Clytie
had learned to catch and harness, and gave to your grandmother, bringing
the letter voluntarily to your grandmother, who (Judith) never called on
anyone now, had no friends now, doubtless knowing no more why she chose
your grandmother to give the letter to than your grandmother knew; not
thin now but gaunt, the Sutpen skull showing indeed now through the
worn, the Coldfield, flesh, the face which had long since forgotten how
to be young and yet absolutely impenetrable, absolutely serene: no
mourning, not even grief, and your grandmother saying, 'Me? You want me
to keep it?â " 'Yes,â Judith said. 'Or destroy it. As you like. Read it
if you like or dont read it if you like. Because you make so little
impression, you see. You get born and you try this and you dont know why
only you keep on trying it and you are born at the same time with a lot
of other people, all mixed up with them, like trying to, having to, move
your arms and legs with strings lOO

Page 93

it would be at least a scratch, something, something that might make a
mark on something that was once for the reason that it can die someday,
while the block of stone cant be is because it never can become was
because it cant ever die or perish. . . . . . .' and your grandmother
watching her, the impenetrable, the calm, the absolutely serene face,
and crying: " âNo! No! Not that! Think of your*' and the face watching
her, comprehending, still serene, not even bitter: " âOh. I? No, not
that. Because somebody will have to take care of Clytie, and Father too
soon, who will want something to eat after he comes home because it wont
last much longer since they have begun to shoot one another now. No. Not
that. Women dont do that for love. I dont even believe that men do. And
not now, anyway. Because there wouldn't be any room now, for them to go
to, wherever it is, if it is It would be full already. Glutted. Like a
theatre, an opera house, if what you expect to find is forgetting,
diversion, entertainment; like a bed already too full if what you want
to find is a chance to lie still and sleep and sleep and sleep'*" Mr
Compson moved. Half rising, Quentin took the letter from him and beneath
the dim bugifouled globe opened lOl

Page 94

had come along and removed, dismantled the wiring or the dynamo, while
the women of the county gradually convinced it that he was merely
waiting to find a wife with a dowry to finish it with. So that when he
entered the Methodist church that Sunday morning in his ironed coat,
there were men as well as women who believed that they had only to look
around the congregation in order to anticipate the direction his feet
would take him, until they became aware that he had apparently marked
down Miss Coldfield's father with the same cold and ruthless
deliberation with which he had probably marked down the French
architect. They watched in shocked amazement while he laid deliberate
siege to the one man in the town with whom he could have had nothing in
common, least of all, moneyia man who obviously could do nothing under
the sun for him save give him credit at a little crossiroads store or
cast a vote in his favor if he should ever seek ordination as a
Methodist ministeria Methodist steward, a merchant not only of modest
position and circumstances but who already had a wife and family of his
own, let alone a dependent mother and sister, to support out of the
proceeds of a business which he had brought to Jefferson ten years ago
in a single wagonia man with a name for absolute and undeviating and
even puritan uprightness in a country and time of lawless opportunity,
who neither drank nor gambled nor even hunted. In their surprise they
forgot that Mr Coldfield had a marriageable daughter. They did not
consider the daughter at all. They did not think of love in connection
with Sutpen. They thought of ruthlessness rather than justice and of
fear rather than respect, but not of pity or love. besides being too
lost in amazed speculation as to just how Sutpen intended or could
contrive to use Mr Coldfield to further whatever secret ends he still
had. They were never to know: even Miss Rosa Coldfield did not. Because
from that day there were no more hunting parties out at Sutpen's
Hundred, and when they saw him now it would be in town. But not loafing,
idling. The men who had slept and matched glasses with him under his
roof (some of them had even come to call him Sutpen without the formal
Mister) watched him pass along the street before the Holston House the
Holston House with a single formal gesture to his hat and go on and
enter Mr Coldfield's store, and that was all. 32

Page 95

itself. Imagine us, an assortment of homogeneous scarecrows, I wont say
hungry because to a woman, lady or female either, below Mason's and
Dixon's in this year 0 f grace 1865, that word would be sheer
redundancy, like saying that we were breathing. And I wont say ragged or
even shoeless, since we have been both long enough to have grown
accustomed to it, only, thank God (and this restores my faith not in
human nature perhaps but at least in man) that he really does not become
inured to hardship and privation: it is only the mind, the gross
omnivorous carrioniheavy soul which becomes inured; the body itself,
thank God, never reconciled from the old soft feel 0 f soap and clean
linen and something between the sole 0 f the foot and the earth to
distinguish it from the foot 0 f a beast. So say we merely needed
ammunition. And imagine us, the scarecrows with one of those concocted
plans 0 f scarecrow desperation which not only must but do work, for the
reason that there is absolutely no room for alternative before man or
heaven, no niche on earth or under it for failure to find space either
to pause or breathe or be graved and sepulchred; and we (the scarecrows)
bringing it off with a great deal 0 f elan, not to say noise; imagine, I
say, the prey and prize, the ten plump defenceless sutlers' wagons, the
scarecrows tumbling out box after beautiful box after beautiful box
stencilled each with that U. and that S. which for four years now has
been to us the symbol 0 f the spoils which belong to the vanquished, o f
the loaves and the fishes as was once the incandescent Brow, the shining
nimbus o f the Thorny Crown; and the scarecrows clawing at the boxes
with stones and bayonets and even with bare hands and opening them at
last and findingiwhat? Stove polish. Gallons and gallons and gallons 0 f
the best stove polish, not a box 0 f it a year old yet and doubtless
still trying to overtake General Sherman with some belated amended field
order requiring him to polish the stove before firing the house. How we
laughed. Yes, we laughed, because I have learned this at least during
these four years: that it really requires an empty stomach to laugh
with, that only when you are hungry or frightened do you extract some
ultimate essence out o f laughing just as the empty stomach extracts the
ultimate essence out of alcohol. But at least we have stove polish. We
have plenty o f it. We have too much, because it does not take much to
say what I have to say, as you can i03

Page 96

see. And so the conclusion and augury which I draw, even though no
philosopher, is this. We have waited long enough. You will notice how I
do not insult you either by saying I have waited long enough. And
therefore, since I do not insult you by saying that only I have waited,
I do not add, expect me. Because I cannot say when to expect me. Because
what IS is something else again because it was not even alive then. And
since because within this sheet 0 f paper you now hold the best of the
old South which is dead, and the words you read were written upon it
with the best (each box said, the very best) of the new North which has
conquered and which therefore, whether 104

Page 97

it likes it or not, will have to survive, I now believe that you and l
are, strangely enough, included among those who are doomed to live. "And
that's all," Mr Compson said. "She received it and she and Clytie made
the wedding gown and the veil from scrapsiperhaps scraps intended for,
which should have gone for, lint and did not. She didn't know when he
would come because he didn't know himself: and maybe he told Henry,
showed Henry the letter before he sent it, and maybe he did not; maybe
still just the watching and the waiting, the one saying to Henry I have
waited long enough and Henry saying to the other Do you renounce then?
Do you renounce? and the other saying I do not renounce. For four years
now I have given chance the opportunity to renounce for me, but it seems
that I am doomed to live, that she and I both are doomed to live;*the
defiance and the ultimatum delivered beside a bivouac fire, the
ultimatum discharged before the gate to which the two of them must have
ridden side by side almost: the one calm and undeviating, perhaps
unresisting even, the fatalist to the last; the other remorseless with
implacable and unalterable grief and despair*" (It seemed to Quentin
that he could actually see them, facing one another at the gate. Inside
the gate what was once a park now spread, unkempt, in shaggy desolation,
with an air dreamy remote and aghast like the unshaven face of a man
just waking from ether, up to a huge house where a young girl waited in
a wedding dress made from stolen scraps, the house partaking too of that
air of scaling desolation, not having suffered from invasion but a shell
marooned and forgotten in a backwater of catastropheia skeleton giving
of itself in slow driblets of furniture and carpet, linen and silver, to
help to die torn and anguished men who knew, even while dying, that for
months now the sacrifice and the anguish were in vain. They faced one
another on the two gaunt horses, two men, young, not yet in the world,
not yet breathed over long enough, to be old but with old eyes, with
unkempt hair and faces gaunt and weathered as if cast by some spartan
and even niggard hand from bronze, in worn and patched gray weathered
now to the color of dead leaves, the one with the tarnished braid of an
officer, the other plain of cuff, the pistol lying yet across the saddle
bow unaimed, the two faces i05

Page 98

calm, the voices not even raised: Dont you pass the shadow of this post,
this branch, Charles; and 1 am going to pass it, Henry) "*and then Wash
Jones sitting that saddleless mule before Miss Rosa's gate, shouting her
name into the sunny and peaceful quiet of the street, saying, 'Air you
Rosie Coldfield? Then you better come on out yon. Henry has done shot
that durn French feller. Kilt him dead as a beef.â "

Page 99

the house. That was all I needed to do since they will have told you
doubtless that I would have had no need for either trunk or bag since
what clothing I possessed, now that the garments which I had been
fortunate enough to inherit from my aunt's kindness or haste or
oversight were long since worn out, consisted o f the ones which Ellen
had remembered from time to time to give me and now Ellen these two
years dead; that I had only to lock the house and take my place in the
buggy and traverse those twelve miles which I had not done since Ellen
died, beside that brute who until Ellen died was not even permitted to
approach the house from the frontithat brute progenitor o f brutes whose
granddaughter was to supplant me, i f not in my sister's house at least
in my sister's bed to which (so they will tell you) I aspiredithat brute
who (brute instrument of that justice which presides over human events
which, incept in the individual, runs smooth, less claw than velvet: but
which, by man or woman flouted, drives on like fiery steel and overrides
both weakly just and unjust strong, both vanquisher and innocent
victimised, ruthless for appointed right and truth) brute who was not
only to preside upon the various shapes and avatars o f Thomas Sutpen's
devil's fate but was to provide at the last the female flesh in which
his name and lineage should be sepulchredithat brute who api io7

Page 100

geared to believe that he had served and performed his appointed end by
yelling of blood and pistols in the street before my house, who seemed
to believe that what further information he might have given me was too
scant or too bland and free 0 f moment to warrant the discarding o f his
tobacco cud, because during the entire subsequent twelve miles he could
not even tell me what had happened. And how I traversed those same
twelve miles once more after the two years since Ellen died (or was it
the four years since Henry vanished or was it the nineteen years since I
saw light and breathed?) knowing nothing , able to learn nothing save
this: a shot heard, faint and far away and even direction and source
indeterminate, by two women, two young women alone in a rotting house
where no man's footstep had sounded in two yearsia shot, then an
interval 0 f aghast surmise above the cloth and needles which engaged
them, then feet, in the hall and then on the stairs, running, hurrying,
the feet of a man: and Judith with just time to snatch up the unfinished
dress and hold it before her as the door burst open upon her brother,
the wild murderer whom she had not seen in four years and whom she
believed to be (if he was, still lived and breathed at all) a thousand
miles away: and then the two of them, the two accursed children on whom
the first blow of their devil's heritage had but that moment fallen,
looking at one another across the upiraised and unfinished wedding
dress. Twelve miles toward that I rode, beside an animal who could stand
in the street before my house and bellow placidly to the populous and
listening solitude that my nephew had just murdered his sister's fiance,
yet who could not permit himself to force the mule which drew us beyond
a walk because âhit wart none of mine nor hisn neither and besides hit
aint had a decent bait o f vittles since the corn give out in February ;
who, turning into the actual gate at last, must stop the mule and,
pointing with the whip and spitting first, say âHit was right yonder.'
*What was right there, fool?â I cried, and he: âHit was' until I took
the whip from him into my own hand and struck the mule. But they cannot
tell you how I went on up the drive, past Ellen's ruined and weedichoked
flower beds and reached the house, the shell, the (so I thought)
cocoonicasket marriageibed of youth and grief and found that I had come,
not too late as I had thought, but come too soon. Rotting portico and
scaling walls, it stood, not ravaged, not invaded, marked by i08

Page 101

just as he did not want just wedding. But he never told Ellen, nor
anyone; in fact, when the female crisis came, when Ellen and the aunt
tried to enlist him on their side to persuade Mr Coldfield to the big
wedding, he refused to support them. He doubtless remembered even better
than Mr Coldfield that two months ago he had been in jail; that public
opinion which at some moment during the five preceding years had
swallowed him even though he never had quite ever lain quiet on its
stomach, had performed one of mankind's natural and 39

Page 102

wild distracted nightbound bird flutter into the brazen and fatal lamp.
âWait, ' she said. Dont you go up there. ' Still I did not stop; it
would require the hand; and I still running on, accomplishing those last
few feet across which we seemed to glare at one another not as two faces
but as the two abstract contradictions which we actually were, neither 0
f our voices raised, as though we spoke to one another free of the
limitations and restrictions 0 f speech and hearing. âWhat?â I said.
âDont you go up there, Rosa. ' That was how she said it: that quiet,
that still, and again it was as though it had not been she who spoke but
the house itself that said the wordsithe house which he had built, which
some suppuration of himself had created about him as the sweat o f his
body might have created, produced some (even i f invisible) cocoonilike
and complementary shell in which Ellen had had to live and die a
stranger, in which Henry and Judith would have to be victims and
prisoners , or die. Because it was not the name, the word, the fact that
she had called me Rosa. As children she had called me that, just as she
had called them Henry and Judith; I knew that even now she still called
Judith (and Henry too when she spoke o f him) by her given name. And she
might very naturally have called me Rosa still, since to everyone else
whom I knew I was still a child. But it was not that. That was not what
she meant at all; in fact, during that instant while we stood face to
face (that instant before my still advancing body should brush past her
and reach the stair) she did me more grace and respect than anyone else
I knew; I knew that from the instant I had entered that door, to her of
all who knew me I was no child. 'Rosa?â I cried. âTo me? To my face?â
Then she touched me, and then I did stop dead. Possibly even then my
body did not stop, since I seemed to be aware of it thrusting blindly
still against the solid yet imponderable weight (she not owner:
instrument; I still say that) of that will to bar me from the stairs;
possibly the sound of the other voice, the single word spoken from the
stairihead above us, had already broken and parted us before it (my
body) had even paused. I do not know. I know only that my entire being
seemed to run at blind full tilt into something monstrous and immobile,
with a shocking impact too soon and too quick to be mere amazement and
outrage at that black arresting and untimorous hand on my white woman's
flesh. Because there is something in the touch of flesh with flesh which
abrogates, cuts sharp and straight across the I I I

Page 103

devious intricate channels 0 f decorous ordering, which enemies as well
as lovers know because it makes them bothzitouch and touch 0 f that
which is the citadel of the central IiAm's private own: not spirit,
soul; the liquorish and ungirdled mind is anyone's to take in any
darkened hallway of this earthly tenement. But let flesh touch with
flesh, and watch the fall 0 f all the eggshell shibboleth o f caste and
color too. Yes, I stopped dead *no woman's hand, no negro's hand, but
bitted bridleicurb to check and guide the furious and unbending willil
crying not to her, to it; speaking to it through the negro, the woman,
only because of the shock which was not yet outrage because it would be
terror soon, expecting and receiving no answer because we both knew it
was not to her I spoke: âTake your hand off me, nigger!â I got none. We
just stood thereiI motionless in the attitude and action 0 f running,
she rigid in that furious immobility, the two 0 f us joined by that hand
and arm which held us, like a fierce rigid umbilical cord, twin sistered
to the fell darkness which had produced her. As a child I had more than
once watched her and Judith and even Henry scuffling in the rough games
which they (possibly all children; I do not know) played, and (so I have
heard) she and Judith even slept together, in the same room but with
Judith in the bed and she on a pallet on the floor ostensibly. But I
have heard how on more than one occasion Ellen has found them both on
the pallet, and once in the bed together. But not 1. Even as a child,
..ERR, COD:l..

Page 104

up, Aunt Rosa; wake up'? Or not expect perhaps, not even hope; not even
dream since dreams dont come in pairs, and had 1 not come twelve miles
drawn not by mortal mule but by some chimaeraifoal of nightmare's very
self? (Ay, wake up, Rosa; wake upinot from what was, what used to be,
but from what had not, could not have ever, been; wake, Rosainot to what
should, what might have been, but to what cannot, what must not, be;
wake, Rosa, from the hoping, who did believe there is a seemliness to
bereavement even though grief be absent; believed there would be need
for you to save not love perhaps, not happiness nor peace, but what was
left behind by widowing *and found that there was nothing there to save;
who hoped to save her as you promised Ellen (not Charles Bon, not Henry:
not either one o f these from him or even from one another) and now too
late, who would have been too late if you had come there from the womb
or had been there already at the full strong capable mortal peak when
she was born; who came twelve miles and nineteen years to save what did
not need the saving, and lost instead yourself) I do not know, except
that 1 did not find it. 1 found only that dreamistate in which you run
without moving from a terror in which you can not believe, toward a
safety in which you have no faith, held so not by the shifting and
foundationless quicksand of l l 3

Page 105

nightmare but by a face which was its soul's own inquisitor, a hand
which was the agent 0 f its own crucifixion, until the voice parted us,
broke the spell. It said one word: âClytie. 'like that, that cold, that
still: not Judith, but the house itself speaking again, though it was
Judith's voice. Oh, I knew it well, who had believed in grieving's
seemliness; I knew it as well as she7Clytie7knew it. She did not move;
it was only the hand, the hand gone before I realised that it had been
removed. I do not know if she removed it or if I ran out from beneath
its touch. But it was gone; and this too they cannot tell you: How I
ran, fled, up the stairs and found no grieving widowed bride but Judith
standing before the closed door to that chamber, in the gingham dress
which she had worn each time I had seen her since Ellen died, holding
something in one hanging hand; and if there had been grief or anguish
she had put them too away, complete or not complete I do not know, along
with that unfinished wedding dress. âYes, Rosa?'she said, like that
again, and I stopped in running's midstride again though my body, blind
unsentient barrow of deluded clay and breath, still advanced: And how I
saw that what she held in that lax and negligent hand was the
photograph, the picture 0 f herself in its metal case which she had
given him, held casual and forgotten against her flank as any
interrupted pastime book. That's what I found. Perhaps it's what I
expected, knew (even at nineteen knew, I would say if it were not for my
nineteen, my own particular kind 0 f nineteen years) that I should find.
Perhaps I couldn't even have wanted more than that, couldn't have
accepted less, who even at nineteen must have known that living is one
constant and perpetual instant when the arrasiveil before whatiisitoibe
hangs docile and even glad to the lightest naked thrust if we had dared,
were brave enough (not wise enough: no wisdom needed here) to make the
rending gash. Or perhaps it is no lack of courage either: not cowardice
which will not face that sickness somewhere at the prime foundation of
this factual scheme from which the prisoner soul, miasmalidistillant,
wroils ever upward sunward, tugs its tenuous prisoner arteries and veins
and prisoning in its turn that spark, that dream which, as the globy and
complete instant o f its freedom mirrors and repeats (repeats? creates,
reduces to a fragile evanescent iridescent sphere) all 0 f space and
time and massy earth, relicts the seething and anonymous miasmal mass
which in all the years of time 1 i4

Page 106

has taught itself no boon o f death but only how to recreate, renew; and
dies, is gone, vanished: nothingibut is that true wisdom which can
comprehend that there is a mightihaveibeen which is more true than
truth, from which the dreamer, waking, says not 'Did I but dream?'but
rather says, indicts high heaven's very self with: 'Why did I wake since
waking I shall never sleep again?â Once there wasiDo you mark how the
wistaria, suniimpacted on this wall here, distills and penetrates this
room as though (lightiunimpeded) by secret and attritive progress from
mote to mote o f obscurity's myriad components? That is the substance 0
f rememberingisense, sight, smell: the muscles with which we see and
hear and feelinot mind, not thought: there is no such thing as memory:
the brain recalls just what the muscles grope for: no more, no less: and
its resultant sum is usually incorrect and false and worthy only 0 f the
name 0 f dream.*See how the sleeping outflung hand, touching the bedside
candle, remembers pain, springs back and free while mind and brain sleep
on and only make of this adjacent heat some trashy myth o f reality's
escape: or that same sleeping hand, in sensuous marriage with some
dulcet surface, is transformed by that same sleeping brain and mind into
that same figmentistuff warped out o f all experience. Ay, grief goes,
fades; we know thatibut ask the tear ducts if they have forgotten how to
weep.*Once there was (they cannot have told you this either) a summer of
wistaria. It was a pervading everywhere of wistaria (I was fourteen
then) as though of all springs yet to capitulate condensed into one
spring, one summer: the spring and summertime which is every female's
who breathed above dust, beholden of all betrayed springs held over from
all irrevocable time, repercussed, bloomed again. It was a vintage year
0 f wistaria: vintage year being that sweet conjunction of root bloom
and urge and hour and weather; and l (I was fourteen)*I will not insist
on bloom, at whom no man had yet to lookinor would everitwice, as not as
child but less than even child; as not more child than woman but even as
less than any female flesh. Nor do I say leafiwarped bitter pale and
crimped halfifledging intimidate of any claim to green which might have
drawn to it the tender mayfly childhood sweetheart games or given pause
to the male predacious wasps and bees of later lust. But root and urge I
do insist and claim, for had I not heired too from all the unsistered
Eves since the Snake? Yes, urge 1 i5

Page 107

I do: warped chrysalis of what blind perfect seed: for who shall say
what gnarled forgotten root might not bloom yet with some globed
concentrate more globed and concentrate and headyiperfect because the
neglected root was planted warped and lay not dead but merely slept
forgot? That was the miscast summer of my barren youth which (for that
short time, that short brief unreturning springtime of the female heart)
I lived out not as a woman, a girl, but rather as the man which I
perhaps should have been. I was fourteen then, fourteen in years if they
could have been called years while in that unpaced corridor which I
called childhood, which was not living but rather some projection o f
the lightless womb itself; I gestate and complete, not aged, just
overdue because 0 f some caesarean lack, some cold headinuzzling forceps
of the savage time which should have torn me free, I waited not for
light but for that doom which we call female victory which is: endure
and then endure, without rhyme or reason or hope 0 f rewardiand then
endure; I like that blind subterranean fish, that insulated spark whose
origin the fish no longer remembers, which pulses and beats at its
crepuscular and lethargic tenement with the old unsleeping itch which
has no words to speak with other than âThis was called light, that
âsmell', that 'touch, that other something which has bequeathed not even
name for sound of bee or bird or flower's scent or light or sun or
love;*yes, not even growing and developing, beloved by and loving light,
but equipped only with that cunning, that inverted cankerigrowth o f
solitude which substitutes the omnivorous and unrational hearingisense
for all the others: so that instead of accomplishing the processional
and measured milestones o f the normal childhood's time I lurked,
unapprehended as though, shod with the very damp and velvet silence of
the womb, I displaced no air, gave off no betraying sound, from one
closed forbidden door to the next and so acquired all I knew o f that
light and space in which people moved and breathed as I (that same
child) might have gained conception o f the sun from seeing it through a
piece 0 f smoky glass;*fourteen, four years younger than Judith, four
years later than Judith's moment which only virgins know: when the
entire delicate spirit's bent is one anonymous climaxless epicene and
unravished nuptial snot that widowed and nightly violation by the
inescapable and scornful dead which is the meed of twenty and thirty and
forty, but a world filled with living marriage like the light and air
which she breathes. But it was i l 6

Page 108

no summer 0 f a virgin's itching discontent; no summer's caesarean lack
which should have torn me, dead flesh or even embryo, from the living:
or else, by friction's ravishing of the maleifurrowed meat, also
weaponed and panoplied as a man instead of hollow woman. It was the
summer after that first Christmas that Henry brought him home, the
summer following the two days of that June vacation which he spent at
Sutpen's Hundred before he rode on to the River to take the steamboat
home, that summer after my aunt left and papa had to go away on business
and l was sent out to Ellen (possibly my father chose Ellen as a refuge
for me because at that time Thomas Sutpen was also absent) to stay so
that she could take care 0 f me, who had been born too late, born into
some curious disjoint of my father's life and left on his (now twice)
widowed hands, I competent enough to reach a kitchen shelf, count spoons
and hem a sheet and measure milk into a churn yet good for nothing else,
yet still too valuable to be left alone. I had never seen him (I never
saw him. I never even saw him dead. I heard a name, I saw a photograph,
I helped to make a grave: and that was all) though he had been in my
house once, that first New Year's Day when Henry brought him from nephew
duty to speak to me on their way back to school and I was not at home.
Until then I had not even heard his name, did not know that he existed.
Yet on the day when I went out there to stay that summer, it was as
though that casual pause at my door had left some seed, some minute
virulence in this cellar earth of mine quick not for love perhaps (I did
not love him; how could I.? I had never even heard his voice, had only
Ellen's word for it that there was such a person) and quick not for the
spying which you will doubtless call it, which during the past six
months between that New Year's and that June gave substance to that
shadow with a name emerging from Ellen's vain and garrulous folly, that
shape without even a face yet because I had not even seen the photograph
then, reflected in the secret and bemused gaze of a young girl: because
I who had learned nothing of love, not even parents' loveithat fond dear
constant violation 0 f privacy, that stultification o f the burgeoning
and incorrigible l which is the meed and due of all mammalian meat,
became not mistress, not beloved, but more than even love; I became all
polymath love's androgynous advocate. There must have been some seed he
left, to cause a child's vacant 1 l7

Page 109

fairyitale to come alive in that garden. Because I was not spying when I
would follow her. I was not spying, though you will say I was. And even
i f it was spying, it was not jealousy, because I did not love him. (How
could I have, when I had never seen him?) And even i f I did, not as
women love, as Judith loved him, or as we thought she did. If it was
love (and I still say, How could it be?) it was the way that mothers
love when, punishing the child she strikes not it but through it strikes
the neighbor boy whom it has just whipped or been whipped by; caresses
not the rewarded child but rather the nameless man or woman who gave the
palmisweated penny. But not as women love. Because I asked nothing 0 f
him, you see. And more than that: I gave him nothing, which is the sum 0
f loving. Why, I didn't even miss him. I dont know even now i f I was
ever aware that I had seen nothing of his face but that photograph, that
shadow, that picture in a young girl's bedroom: a picture casual and
framed upon a littered dressing table yet bowered and dressed (or so I
thought) with all the maiden and invisible lilyiroses, because even
before I saw the photograph I could have recognised, nay, described, the
very face. But I never saw it. I do not even know of my own knowledge
that Ellen ever saw it, that Judith ever loved it, that Henry slew it:
so who will dispute me when I say, Why did I not invent, create it?7And
I know this: i f I were God I would invent out o f this seething turmoil
we call progress something (a machine perhaps) which would adorn the
barren mirror altars o f every plain girl who breathes with such as
thisiwhich is so little since we want so littleithis pictured face. It
would not even need a skull behind it; almost anonymous, it would only
need vague inference of some walking flesh and blood desired by someone
else even if only in some shadowirealm o f makeibelieve.7A picture seen
by stealth, by creeping (my childhood taught me that instead of love and
it stood me in good stead; in fact, if it had taught me love, love could
not have stood me so) into the deserted midday room to look at it. Not
to dream, since I dwelt in the dream, but to renew, rehearse, the part
as the faulty though eager amateur might steal wingward in some interim
o f the visible scene to hear the prompter's momentary voice. And i f
jealousy, not man's jealousy, the jealousy o f the lover; not even the
lover's self who spies from love, who spies to watch, taste, touch that
maiden revery of solitude which is the first thinning o f that veil we
call virginity; not to spring out, force that ee8

Page 110

to me of love but let me tell you, who know already more of love than
you will ever know or need.â Then my father returned and came for me and
took me home and I became again that nondescript too long a child yet
too short a woman, in the fitless garments which my aunt had left
behind, keeping a fitless house, who was not spying, hiding, but
waiting, watching, for no reward, no thanks, who did not love him in the
sense we mean it because there is no love of that sort without hope; who
(if it were love) loved with that sort beyond the compass of glib books:
that love which gives up what it never hadithat penny's modicum which is
the donor's all yet whose infinitesimal weight adds nothing to the
substance 0 f the 1 lg

Page 111

talking to one another in the long silence of notpeople in notlanguage,
like this: It seems that this demonihis name was Sutpen7(Colonel
Sutpen)7Colonel Sutpen. Who came out o f nowhere and without warning
upon the land with a band of strange niggers though his very impression
(or lack o f it) on Cold field or Sutpen walls held portentous prophecy
o f what was to be;7Yes, running out o f that first year (that year
before the War) during which Ellen talked to me o f trousseau (and it my
trousseau), of all the dreamy panoply of surrender which was my
surrender , who had so little to surrender that it was all 1 had because
there is that mightihaveibeen which is the single rock we cling to above
the maelstrom of unbearable reality;*the four years while I believed she
waited as I waited, while the stable world we had been taught to know
dissolved in fire and smoke until peace and security were gone, and
pride and hope, and there was left only maimed honor's veterans, and
love. Yes, there should, there must, be love and faith: these left with
us by fathers, husbands, sweethearts, brothers, who carried the pride
and the hope of peace in honor's vanguard as they did the flags; there
must be these, else what do men fight for? what else worth dying for?
Yes, dying not for honor's empty sake, nor pride nor even peace, but for
that love and faith they left behind. Because he was to die; 1 know
that, knew that, as both pride and peace were: else how to prove love's
immortality? But not love, not faith itself, themselves. Love without
hope perhaps, faith with little to be proud with: but love and faith at
least above the murdering and the l 20

Page 112

Missus Judy wouldn't like hit. ')*I remember how as we carried him down
the stairs and out to the waiting wagon I tried to take the full weight
of the coffin to prove to myself that he was really in it. And I could
not tell. I was one o f his pall bearers, yet I could not, would not
believe something which I knew could not but be so. Because I never saw
him. You see? There are some things which happen to us which the
intelligence and the senses refuse just as the stomach sometimes refuses
what the palate has accepted but which digestion cannot
compassioccurrences which stop us dead as though by some impalpable
intervention, like a sheet of glass through which we watch all
subsequent events transpire as though in a soundless vacuum, and fade,
vanish; are gone, leaving us immobile, impotent, helpless; fixed, until
we can die. That was L l was there; something 0 f me walked in measured
cadence with the measured tread of Jones and his companion, and
Theophilus McCaslin who had heard the news somehow back in town, and
Clytie as we bore the awkward and unmanageable box past the stair's
close turning while Judith, following, steadied it from behind, and so
down and out to the wagon, something 0 f me helped to raise that which
it could not have raised alone yet which it still could not believe,
into the waiting wagon; something of me stood beside the gashy earth in
the cedars' somber gloom and heard the clumsy knell o f clods upon the
wood and answered No when Judith at the grave's mounded end said, âHe
was a Catholic. Do any of you all know how Catholics 'and Theophilus
McCaslin said, âCatholic be damned; he was a soldier. And I can pray for
any Confedrit soldier' and then cried in his old man's shrill harsh loud
cacophonous voice: âYaaaay, Forrest! Yaaaay, John Sartoris!
YaaaaaayE'And something walked with Judith and Clytie back across that
sunset field and answered in some curious serene suspension to the
serene quiet voice which talked o f plowing corn and cutting winter
wood, and in the lamplit kitchen helped this time to cook the meal and
helped to eat it too within the room beyond whose ceiling he no longer
lay, and went to bed (yes, took a candle from that firm untrembling hand
and thought âShe did not even weep' and then in a lampigloomed mirror
saw my own face and thought âNor did you either) within that house where
he had sojourned for another brief (and this time final) space and left
no trace of him, not even tears. Yes. One day he was not. Then he was.
Then he was not. It was too short, too fast, too quick; I 22

Page 113

six hours 0 f a summer afternoon saw it allia space too short to leave
even the imprint o f a body on a mattress, and blood can come from
anywhere *if there was blood, since I never saw him. For all I was
allowed to know, we had no corpse; we even had no murderer (we did not
even speak of Henry that day, not one o f us; I did not sayithe aunt,
the spinster, âDid he look well or ill?â I did not say one o f the
thousand trivial things with which the indomitable womaniblood ignores
the man's world in which the blood kinsman shows the courage or
cowardice, the folly or lust or fear, for which his fellows praise or
crucify him) who came and crashed a door and cried his crime and
vanished, who for the fact that he was still alive was just that much
more shadowy than the abstraction which we had nailed into a boxia shot
heard only by its echo, a strange gaunt halfiwild horse, bridled and
with empty saddle, the saddle bags containing a pistol, a worn clean
shirt, a lump 0 f ironilike bread, captured by a man four miles away and
two days later while trying to force the crib door in his stable. Yes,
more than that: he was absent, and he was; he returned, and he was not;
three women put something into the earth and covered it, and he had
never been. Now you will ask me why I stayed there. I could say, I do
not know, could give ten thousand paltry reasons, all untrue, and be
believedzithat I stayed for food, who could have combed ditchibanks and
weedibeds, made and worked a garden as well at my own home in town as
here, not to speak of neighbors, friends whose alms I might have
accepted, since necessity has a way 0 f obliterating from our conduct
various delicate scruples regarding honor and pride; that I stayed for
shelter, who had a roof of my own in fee simple now indeed; or that I
stayed for company, who at home could have had the company of neighbors
who were at least 0 f my own kind, who had known me all my life and even
longer in the sense that they thought not only as I thought but as my
forbears thought, while here I had for company one woman whom, for all
she was blood kin to me, I did not understand and, if what my
observation warranted me to believe was true, I did not wish to
understand, and another who was so foreign to me and to all that l was
that we might have been not only of different races (which we were), not
only of different sexes (which we were not), but 0 f different species,
speaking no language which the other understood, the very simple words
with which we were forced to l za

Page 114

adjust our days to one another being even less inferential o f thought
or intention than the sounds which a beast and a bird might make to each
other. But I dont say any 0 f these. I stayed there and waited for
Thomas Sutpen to come home. Yes. You will say (or believe) that I waited
even then to become engaged to him; if I said I did not, you would
believe I lied. But I do say I did not. I waited for him exactly as
Judith and Clytie waited for him: because now he was all we had, all
that gave us any reason for continuing to exist, to eat food and sleep
and wake and rise again: knowing that he would need us, knowing as we
did (who knew him) that he would begin at once to salvage what was left
0 f Sutpen's Hundred and restore it. Not that we would or did need him.
(I had never for one instant thought of marriage, never for one instant
imagined that he would look at me, see me, since he never had. You may
believe me, because I shall make no bones to say so when the moment
comes to tell you when I did think of it.) No. It did not even require
the first day of the life we were to lead together to show us that we
did not need him, had not the need for any man so long as Wash Jones
lived or stayed thereiI who had kept my father's house and he alive for
almost four years, Judith who had done the same out here, and Clytie who
could cut a cord 0 f wood or run a furrow better (or at least quicker)
than Jones himself.7And this the sad fact, one of the saddest: that
weary tedium which the heart and spirit feel when they no longer need
that to whose need they (the spirit and the heart) are necessary. No. We
did not need him, not even vicariously, who could not even join him in
his furious (that almost mad intention which he brought home with him,
seemed to project, radiate ahead 0 f him before he even dismounted)
desire to restore the place to what it had been that he had sacrificed
pity and gentleness and love and all the soft virtues for *if he had
ever had them to sacrifice, felt their lack, desired them of others. Not
even that. Neither Judith nor I wanted that. Perhaps it was because we
did not believe it could be done, but I think ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 115

impervious enough, even if it did not matter to the walls whether we ate
or not. And amicably, not as two white women and a negress, not as three
negroes or three whites, not even as three women, but merely as three
creatures who still possessed the need to eat but took no pleasure in
it, the need to sleep but from no joy in weariness or regeneration, and
in whom sex was some forgotten atrophy like the rudimentary gills we
call the tonsils or the stilliopposable thumbs for old climbing. We kept
the house, what part 0 f it we lived in, used; we kept the room which
Thomas Sutpen would return toinot that one which he left, a husband, but
the one to which he should return a sonless widower, barren of that
posterity which he doubtless must have wanted who had gone to the
trouble and expense of getting children and housing them among imported
furniture beneath crystal chandeliersijust as we kept Henry's room, as
Judith and Clytie kept it that is, as i f he had not run up the stairs
that summer afternoon and then run down again; we grew and tended and
harvested with our own hands the food we ate, made and worked that
garden just as we cooked and ate the food which came out of it: with no
distinction among the three of us of age or color but just as to who
could build this fire or stir this pot or weed this bed or carry this
apron full of corn to the mill for meal with least cost to the general
good in time or expense of other duties. It was as though we were one
being, interchangeable and indiscriminate, which kept that garden
growing, spun thread and wove the cloth we wore, hunted and found and
rendered the meagre ditchiside herbs to protect and guarantee what
spartan compromise we dared or had the time to make with illness,
harried and nagged that Jones into working the corn and cutting the wood
which was to be our winter's warmth and sustenance;*the three of us,
three women: 1 drafted by circumstance at too soon an age into a
pinchipenny housewifery which might have existed just as well upon a
lighthouse rock, which had not even taught me how to cultivate a bed of
flowers, let alone a kitchen garden, which had taught me to look upon
fuel and meat as something appearing by its own volition in a woodbox or
on a pantry shelf; Judith created by circumstance (circumstance ? a
hundred years of careful nurturing, perhaps not by blood, not even Cold
field blood, but certainly by the tradition in which Thomas Sutpen's
ruthless will had carved a niche) to pass through the soft insulated and
unscathed cocoon stages: bud, served prolific queen, then 1 25

Page 116

potent and softihanded matriarch o f old age's serene and wellilived
content *Judith handicapped by what in me was a few years' ignorance but
which in her was ten generations 0 f iron prohibition, who had not
learned that first principle of penury which is to scrimp and save for
the sake of scrimping and saving, who (and abetted by Clytie) would cook
twice what we could eat and three times what we could afford and give it
to anyone, any stranger in a land already beginning to fill with
straggling soldiers who stopped and asked for it; and (but not least)
Clytie. Clytie, not inept, anything but inept: perverse inscrutable and
paradox: free, yet incapable o f freedom who had never once called
herself a slave, holding fidelity to none like the indolent and solitary
wolf or bear (yes, wild: half untamed black, half Sutpen blood: and if
'untamed' be synonymous with 'wild, then 'Sutpen' is the silent
unsleeping viciousness o f the tamer's lash) whose false seeming holds
it docile to fear's hand but which is not, which if this be fidelity,
fidelity only to the prime fixed principle of its own savageness;*Clytie
who in the very pigmentation o f her flesh represented that debacle
which had brought Judith and me to what we were and which had made of
her (Clytie) that which she declined to be just as she had declined to
be that from which its purpose had been to emancipate her, as though
presiding aloof upon the new, she deliberately remained to represent to
us the threatf ul portent o f the old. We were three strangers. 1 do not
know what Clytie thought, what life she led which the food we raised and
cooked in unison, the cloth we spun and wove together, nourished and
sheltered. But I expected that because she and I were open, ay
honorable, enemies. But 1 did not even know what Judith thought and
felt. We slept in the same room, the three of us (this for more than to
conserve the firewood which we had to carry in ourselves. We did it for
safety. It was winter soon and already soldiers were beginning to come
backithe stragglers, not all of them tramps, ruffians, but men who had
risked and lost everything, suffered beyond endurance and had returned
now to a ruined land, not the same men who had marched away but
transformediand this the worst, the ultimate degradation to which war
brings the spirit, the souliinto the likeness of that man who abuses
from very despair and pity the beloved wife or mistress who in his
absence has been raped. We were afraid. We fed them; we gave them what
and all we had and we would have assumed their wounds and left l 26

Page 117

useless impotent womaniworrying about the absent maleias to how he
fared, i f he were cold or hungry or not, just as we talked of his
father, as if both they and we still lived in that time which that shot,
those running mad feet, had put a period to and then obliterated, as
though that afternoon had never been. But not once did we mention
Charles Bon. There were two afternoons in the late fall when Judith was
absent, returning at supper time serene and calm. I did not ask and I
did not follow her, yet I knew and I knew that Clytie knew that she had
gone to clear that grave o f dead leaves and the sere brown refuse of
the cedarsithat mound vanishing slowly back into the earth, beneath
which we had buried nothing. No, there had been no shot. That sound was
merely the sharp and final clapito of a door between us and all that
was, all that might have beenia retroactive severance o f the stream of
event: a forever crystallised instant in imponderable time accomplished
by three weak yet indomitable women which, preceding the accomplished
fact which we declined, refused, robbed the brother of the prey, reft
the murderer of a victim for his very bullet. That was how we lived for
seven months. And then one afternoon in January Thomas Sutpen came home;
someone looked up from where we were preparing the garden for another
year's food and saw him riding up the drive. And then one evening I
became engaged to many him. It took me just three months. (Do you mind
how I dont say he, but P) Yes, I, just three months, who for twenty
years had looked on him (when I didihad toilook) as an ogre, some beast
out of a tale to frighten l 27

Page 118

children with; who had seen his own get upon my dead sister's body
already begin to destroy one another, yet who must come to him like a
whistled dog at that first opportunity, that noon when he who had been
seeing me for twenty years should first raise his head and pause and
look at me. Oh, I hold no brief for myself who could (and would; ay,
doubtless have already) give you a thousand specious reasons good enough
for women, ranging from woman's natural inconsistency to the desire (or
even hope) for possible wealth, position, or even the fear of dying
manless which (so they will doubtless tell you) old maids always have,
or for revenge. No. I hold no brief for me. I could have gone home and I
did not. Perhaps I should have gone home. But I did not. As Judith and
Clytie did, I stood there before the rotting portico and watched him
ride up on that gaunt and jaded horse on which he did not seem to sit
but rather seemed to project himself ahead like a mirage, in some fierce
dynamic rigidity of impatience which the gaunt horse, the saddle, the
boots, the leaficolored and threadbare coat with its tarnished and
flapping braid containing the sentient though nerveless shell, could not
keep up with, which seemed to precede him as he dismounted and out of
which he said âWell, daughter'and stooped and touched his beard to
Judith's forehead, who had not, did not, move, who stood rigid and still
and immobile of face, and within which they spoke four sentences, four
sentences 0 f simple direct words behind beneath above which I felt that
same rapport of communal blood which I had sensed that day while Clytie
held me from the stairs: âHenry's not ?' âNo. He's not here.' 7 Ah.
And7?' âYes. Henry killed him. 'and then burst into tears. Yes, burst,
who had not wept yep who had brought down the stairs that afternoon and
worn ever since that cold calm face which had stopped me in midrunning
at that closed door; yes, burst, as i f that entire accumulation o f
seven months were erupting spontaneously from every pore in one
incredible evacuation (she not moving, not moving a muscle) and then
vanishing, disappearing as instantaneously as i f the very fierce and
arid aura which he had enclosed her in were drying the tears faster than
they emerged: and still standing with his hands on her shoulders and
looked at Clytie and said, Ah, Clytie' and then at meithe same face
which I had last seen, only a little thinner, the same ruthless eyes,
the hair grizzled a little now, and no I 28

Page 119

recognition in the face at all until Judith said, It's Rosa. Aunt Rosa.
She lives here now.' That was all. He rode up the drive and into our
lives again and left no ripple save those instantaneous and incredible
tears. Because he himself was not there, not in the house where we spent
our days, had not stopped there. The shell of him was there, using the
room which we had kept for him and eating the food which we produced and
prepared as if it could neither feel the softness of the bed nor make
distinction between the viands either as to quality or taste. Yes. He
wasn't there. Something ate with us; we talked to it and it answered
questions; it sat with us before the fire at night and, rousing without
any warning from some profound and bemused complete inertia, talked, not
to us, the six ears, the three minds capable of listening, but to the
air, the waiting grim decaying presence, spirit, of the house itself,
talking that which sounded like the bombast o f a madman who creates
within his very coffin walls his fabulous immeasurable Camelots and
Carcassonnes. Not absent from the place, the arbitrary square of earth
which he had named Sutpen's Hundred: not that at all. He was absent only
from the room, and that because he had to be elsewhere, a part of him
encompassing each ruined field and fallen fence and crumbling wall 0 f
cabin or cotton house or crib; himself diffused and in solution held by
that electric furious immobile urgency and awareness of short time and
the need for haste as if he had just drawn breath and looked about and
realised that he was old (he was fiftyinine) and was concerned (not
afraid: concerned) not that old age might have left him impotent to do
what he intended to do, but that he might not have time to do it in
before he would have to die. We were right about what he would intend to
do: that he would not even pause for breath before undertaking to
restore his house and plantation as near as possible to what it had
been. We did not know how he would go about it, nor 1 believe did he. He
could not have known, who came home with nothing, to nothing, to four
years less than nothing. But it did not stop him, intimidate him. His
was that cold alert fury of the gambler who knows that he may lose
anyway but that with a second's flagging of the fierce constant will he
is sure to: and who keeps suspense from ever quite crystallising by
sheer fierce manipulation of the cards or dice until the 1 2q

Page 120

ducts and glands of luck begin to flow again. He did not pause, did not
take that day or two to let the bones and flesh o f fiftyinine
recuperatei the day or two in which he might have talked, not about us
and what we had been doing, but about himself, the past four years (for
all he ever told us, there might not have been any war at all, or it on
another planet and no stake o f his risked on it, no flesh and blood 0 f
his to suffer by it)* that natural period during which bitter though
unmaimed defeat might have exhausted itself to something like peace,
like quiet in the raging and incredulous recounting (which enables man
to bear with living) 0 f that feather's balance between victory and
disaster which makes that defeat unbearable which, turning against him,
yet declined to slay him who, still alive, yet cannot bear to live with
it. We hardly ever saw him. He would be gone from dawn until dark, he
and Jones and another man or two that he had got from somewhere and paid
with something, perhaps the same coin in which he had paid that foreign
architecticajolery, promise, threat, and at last force. That was the
winter when we began to learn what carpetibagger meant and people*
womenilocked doors and windows at night and began to frighten each other
with tales of negro uprisings, when the ruined, the four years' fallow
and neglected land lay more idle yet while men with pistols in their
pockets gathered daily at secret meeting places in the towns. He did not
make one o f these; 1 remember how one night a deputation called, rode
out through the mud of early March and put him to the point of definite
yes or no, with them or against them, friend or enemy: and he refused,
declined, offered them (with no change 0 f gaunt ruthless face nor level
voice) defiance i f it was defiance they wanted, telling them that i f
every man in the South would do as he himself was doing, would see to
the restoration 0 f his own land, the general land and South would save
itself. and ushered them from the room and from the house and stood
plain in the doorway holding the lamp above his head while their
spokesman delivered his ultimatum: 'This may be war, Sutpen, and
answered, 1 am used to it.' Oh yes, 1 watched him, watched his old man's
solitary fury fighting now not with the stubborn yet slowly tractable
earth as it had done before, but now against the ponderable weight 0 f
the changed new time itself as though he were trying to dam a river with
his bare hands and a shingle: and this for the same spurious delusion of
reward which i30

Page 121

had failed (failed? betrayed: and would this time destroy) him once; 1
see the analogy myself now: the accelerating circle's fatal curving
course of his ruthless pride, his lust for vain magnificence, though 1
did not then. And how could P turned twenty true enough yet still a
child, still living in that wombilike corridor where the world came not
even as living echo but as dead incomprehensible shadow, where with the
quiet and unalarmed amazement of a child 1 watched the miragy antics of
men and womenimy father, my sister, Thomas Sutpen, Judith, Henry,
Charles Bonicalled honor, principle, marriage, love, bereavement, death;
the child who watching him was not a child but one of that triumvirate
motheriwoman which we three, Judith Clytie and 1, made, which fed and
clothed and warmed the static shell and so gave vent and scope to the
fierce vain illusion and so said, âAt last my life is worth something,
even though it only shields and guards the antic fury o f an insane
child.' And then one afternoon (I was in the garden with a hoe, where
the path came up from the stable lot) 1 looked up and saw him looking at
me. He had seen me for twenty years, but now he was looking at me; he
stood there in the path looking at me, in the middle of the afternoon.
That was it: that it should have been in the middle 0 f the afternoon,
when he should not have been anywhere near the house at all but miles
away and invisible somewhere among his hundred square miles which they
had not troubled to begin to take away from him yet, perhaps not even at
this point or at that point but diffused (not attenuated to thinness but
enlarged, magnified , encompassing as though in a prolonged and unbroken
instant of tremendous effort embracing and holding intact that tenimile
square while he faced from the brink of disaster, invincible and
unafraid, what he must have known would be the final defeat) but instead
0 f that standing there in the path looking at me with something curious
and strange in his face as if the barnlot, the path at the instant when
he came in sight of me had been a swamp out of which he had emerged
without having been forewarned that he was about to enter light, and
then went onithe face, the same face: it was not love; I do not say
that, not gentleness or pity: just a sudden overiburst of light,
illumination, who had been told that his son had done murder and
vanished and said âAh.7 Well, Clytie. ' He went on to the house. But it
was not love: I do not ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 122

he had needed, used me; why should I rebel now, because he would use me
more? but I did not say it; I could say this time, I do not know, and I
would tell the truth. Because I do not know. He was gone, I did not even
know that either since there is a metabolism 0 f the spirit as well as o
f the entrails, in which the stored accumulations o f long time burn,
generate, create and break some maidenhead o f the ravening meat; ay, in
a second's time;*yes, lost all the shibboleth erupting o f cannot, will
not, never will in one red instant's fierce obliteration. This was my
instant, who could have fled then and did not, who found that he had
gone on and did not remember when he had walked away, who found my okra
bed finished without remembering the completing o f it, who sat at the
supper table that night with the familiar dreamicloudy shell which we
had grown used to (he did not look at me again during the meal; I might
have said then, To what deluded sewerigush of dreaming does the
incorrigible flesh betray us: but I did not) and then before the fire in
Judith's bedroom sat as we always did until he came in the door and
looked at us and said, 'Judith, you and Clytie ' and ceased, still
entering, then said, 'No, never mind. Rosa will not mind i f you both
hear it too, since we are short for time and busy with what we have 0 f
Wand came and stopped and put his hand on my head and (I do not know
what he looked at while he spoke, save that by the sound 0 f his voice
it was not at us nor at anything in that room) said, 'You may think I
made your sister Ellen no very good husband . You probably do think so.
But even if you will not discount the fact that I am older now, I
believe I can promise that I shall do no worse at least for you.' That
was my courtship. That minute's exchanged look in a kitchen garden, that
hand upon my head in his daughter's bedroom; a ukase, a decree, a serene
and florid boast like a sentence (ay, and delivered in the same
attitude) not to be spoken and heard but to be read carved in the bland
stone which pediments a forgotten and nameless effigy. I do not excuse
it. I claim no brief, no pity, who did not answer '1 will' not because I
was not asked, because there was no place, no niche, no interval for
reply. Because I could have made one. I could have forced that niche
myself if I had willed toia niche not shaped to fit mild 'Yes' but some
blind desperate female weapon's frenzied slash whose very gaping wound
had cried 'No! No!â and 'Help!â and 'Save me!â No, no brief, no pity,
who I 32

Page 123

did not even move, who sat beneath that hard oblivious childhood ogre's
hand and heard him speak to Judith now, heard Judith's feet, saw
Judith's hand, not Judithithat palm in which I read as from a printed
chronicle the orphaning, the hardship, the bereave o f love; the four
hard barren years of scoriating loom, o f axe and hoe and all the other
tools decreed for men to use: and upon it lying the ring which he gave
Ellen in the church almost thirty years ago. Yes, analogy and paradox
and madness too. I sat there and felt not watched him slip the ring onto
my finger in my turn (he was sitting now also, in the chair which we
called Clytie's while she stood just beyond the firelight's range beside
the chimney) and listened to his voice as Ellen must have listened in
her own spirit's April thirty years ago: he talking not about me or love
or marriage, not even about himself and to no sane mortal listening nor
out of any sanity, but to the very dark forces of fate which he had
evoked and dared, out of that wild braggart dream where an intact
Sutpen's Hundred which no more had actual being now (and would never
have again) than it had when Ellen first heard it, as though in the
restoration 0 f that ring to a living finger he had turned all time back
twenty years and stopped it, froze it. Yes. I sat there and listened to
his voice and told myself, Why, he is mad. He will decree this marriage
for tonight and perform his own ceremony, himself both groom and
minister; pronounce his own wild benediction on it with the very bedward
candle in his hand: and I mad too, for I will acquiesce, succumb; abet
him and plunge down. ' No, I hold no brief, ask no pity. l f I was saved
that night (and l was saved; mine was to be some later, colder sacrifice
when weiIishould be free 0 f all excuse o f the surprised importunate
traitorous flesh) it was no fault no doing of my own but rather because,
once he had restored the ring, he ceased to look at me save as he had
looked for the twenty years before that afternoon, as i f he had reached
for the moment some interval 0 f sanity such as the mad know, just as
the sane have intervals of madness to keep them aware that they are
sane. It was more than that even. For three months now he had seen me
daily though he had not looked at me since I merely made one of that
triumvirate who received his gruff unspoken man's gratitude for the
spartan ease we supplied, not to his comfort perhaps but at least to the
mad dream he lived in. But for the next two months he did not even see
me. Perhaps the reason was the obvious one: he was too busy; that having
accomplished 133

Page 124

his engagement (granted that was what he wanted) he did not need to see
me. Certainly he did not: there was not even any date set for the
wedding. It was almost as though that very afternoon did not exist, had
never happened. I might not have even been there in the house. Worse: I
could have gone, returned home, and he would not have missed me. I was
(whatever it was he wanted 0 f meinot my being, my presence: just my
existence, whatever it was that Rosa Goldfield or any young female no
blood kin to him represented in whatever it was he wantedibecause I will
do him this credit: he had never once thought about what he asked me to
do until the moment he asked it because I know that he would not have
waited two months or even two days to ask it)*my presence was to him
only the absence 0 f black morass and snarled vine and creeper to that
man who had struggled through a swamp with nothing to guide or drive
himino hope, no light: only some incorrigibility o f unde featiand
blundered at last and without warning onto dry solid ground and sun and
air *if there could have been such thing as sun to him, i f anyone or
any thing could have competed with the white glare of his madness. Yes,
mad, yet not so mad. Because there is a practicality to viciousness: the
thief, the liar, the murderer even, has faster rules than virtue ever
has; why not madness too? If he was mad, it was only his compelling
dream which was insane and not his methods: it was no madman who
bargained and cajoled hard manual labor out o f men like Jones; it was
no madman who kept clear of the sheets and hoods and nightigalloping
horses with which men who were once his acquaintances even i f not his
friends discharged the canker suppuration of defeat; it was no madman's
plan or tactics which gained him at the lowest possible price the sole
woman available to wive him, and by the one device which could have
gained his points snot madman, no: since surely there is something in
madness, even the demoniac, which Satan }lees, aghast at his own
handiwork, and which God looks on in pityisome spark, some crumb to
leaven and redeem that articulated flesh, that speech sight hearing
taste and being which we call human man. But no matter. I will tell you
what he did and let you be the judge. (Or try to tell you, because there
are some things for which three words are three too many, and three
thousand words that many words too less, and this is one o f them. It
can be told, I could take that many sentences, repeat the bold blank
naked and outrageous words just as he 134

Page 125

that will fit your dream but I can give you airy space and scope for
your delirium. 'And then one afternoonioh there was a fate in it:
afternoon and afternoon and afternoon: do you see? the death 0 f hope
and love, the death 0 f pride and principle, and then the death of
everything save the old outraged and aghast unbelieving which has lasted
for fortyithree years *he returned to the house and called me, shouting
from the back gallery until I came down; oh I told you he had not
thought 0 f it until that moment, that prolonged moment which contained
the distance between the house and wherever it was he had been standing
when he thought 0 f it: and this too coincident: it was the very day on
which he knew definitely and at last exactly how much 0 f his hundred
square miles he would be able to save and keep and call his own on the
day when he would have to die, that no matter what happened to him now,
he would at least retain the shell 0 f Sutpen's Hundred even though a
better name for it would now be Sutpen's Oneicalled, shouted for me
until I came down. He had not even waited to tether his horse; he stood
with the reins over his arm (and no hand on my head now) and spoke the
bald outrageous words exactly as i f he were consulting with Jones or
with some other man about a bitch dog or a cow or mare. They will have
told you how I came back home. Oh yes, I know: 'Rosie Coldfield, lose
him, weep him; caught a man but couldn't keep him* Oh yes, I know (and
kind too; they would be kind): Rosa Coldfield, warped bitter orphaned
country stick called Rosa Cold field, safely engaged at last and so oft
the town, the county; they will have told you: How I went out there to
live for the rest 0 f my life, seeing in my nephew's murdering an act of
God enabling me ostensibly to obey my dying sister's request that I save
at least one o f the two children which she had doomed by conceiving
them but actually to be in the house when he returned who, being a
demon, would therefore be impervious to shot and shell and so would
return; I waiting for him because I was young still (who had buried no
hopes to bugles, beneath a flag) and ripe for marrying in this time and
place where most of the young men were dead and all the living ones
either old or already married or tired, too tired for love; he my best
my only chance in this: an environment where at best and even lacking
war my chances would have been slender enough since I was not only a 136

Page 126

Southern gentlewoman but the very modest character of whose background
and circumstances must needs be their own affirmation since had 1 been
the daughter of a wealthy planter 1 could have married almost anyone but
being the daughter merely of a small storeikeeper I could even afford to
accept flowers from almost no one and so would have been doomed to marry
at last some casual apprenticeiclerk in my father's business;7Yes, they
will have told you: who was young and had buried hopes only during that
night which was four years long when beside a shuttered and unsleeping
candle she embalmed the War and its heritage o f suffering and injustice
and sorrow on the backsides o f the pages within an old account book,
embalming blotting from the breathable air the poisonous secret
effluvium of lusting and hating and killing;*they will have told you.
daughter 0 f an embusque who had to turn to a demon, a villain: and
therefore she had been right in hating her father since if he had not
died in that attic she would not have had to go out there to find food
and protection and shelter and if she had not had to depend on his food
and clothing (even if she did help to grow and weave it) to keep her
alive and warm until simple justice demanded that she make what return
for it he might require of her commensurate with honor she would not
have become engaged to him and i f she had not become engaged to him she
would not have had to lie at night asking herself Why and Why and Why as
she has done for fortyithree years: as i f she had been instinctively
right even as a child in hating her father and so these fortyithree
years of impotent and unbearable outrage were the revenge o f some
sophisticated and ironic sterile nature on her for having hated that
which gave her life.7Yes, Rosa Coldfield engaged at last who, lacking
the fact that her sister had bequeathed her at least something 0 f
shelter and kin, might have become a charge upon the town: and now Rosie
Coldfield, lose him, weep him; found a man but failed to keep him; Rosa
Cold field who would be right only right, being right, is not enough for
women who had rather be wrong than just that who want the man who was
wrong to admit it. And that's what she cant forgive him for: not for the
insult, not even for having jilted her* but for being dead. Oh yes, 1
know, 1 know: How two months later they learned that she had packed up
her belongings (that is, put on the shawl and hat again) and come back
to town, to live alone 137

Page 127

in the house where her parents were dead and gone and where Judith would
come now and then and bring her some 0 f what food they had out at
Sutpen's Hundred and which only dire necessity, the brute inexplicable
flesh's stubborn will to live, brought her (Miss Coldfield) to accept.
And it dire indeed: because now the townifarmers passing, negro servants
going to work in white kitchensiwould see her before sunup gathering
greens along garden fences, pulling them through the fence since she had
no garden of her own, no seed to plant one with, no tools to work it
with herself even i f she had known completely how who had had only the
freshman year at gardening and doubtless would not have worked it i f
she had known who had never surrendered; reaching through the garden
fence and gathering vegetables who would have been welcome to enter the
garden and get them and they would have even done the gathering and sent
them to her since there were more people than judge Benbow who would
leave baskets o f provisions on her front porch at night but she would
not permit them who would not even use a stick to reach through the
fence and draw the vegetables to where she could grasp them, the reach
of her unaided arm being the limit of brigandage which she never passed,
and it not to keep from being seen stealing which sent her forth before
the town was awake because i f she had had a nigger she would have sent
him forth in broad daylight to forage, where, she would not have cared,
exactly as the cavalry heroes whom she wrote verse about would have sent
their men.7Yes, Rosie Coldfield, lose him, weep him; caught a beau but
couldn't keep him; (oh yes, they will tell you) found a beau and was
insulted, something heard and not forgiven, not so much for the saying
of it but for having thought it about her so that when she heard it she
realised like thunderclap that it must have been in his mind for a day,
a week, even a month maybe, he looking at her daily with that in his
mind and she not even knowing it. But I forgave him. They will tell you
different, but I did. Why shouldn't P I had nothing to forgive; I had
not lost him because I never owned him: a certain segment 0 f rotten mud
walked into my life, spoke that to me which I had never heard before and
never shall again, and then walked out; that was all. I never owned him,
certainly not in that sewer sense which you would mean by that and maybe
think (but you are wrong) I mean. That did not matter. That was not even
i38

Page 128

the nub o f the insult. I mean that he was not owned by anyone or
anything in this world, had never been, would never be, not even by
Ellen, not even by Jones' granddaughter. Because he was not articulated
in this world. He was a walking shadow. He was the lightiblinded
batilike image of his own torment cast by the fierce demoniac lantern up
from beneath the earth's crust and hence in retrograde, reverse; from
abysmal and chaotic dark to eternal and abysmal dark completing his
descending (do you mark the gradation?) ellipsis, clinging, trying to
cling with vain unsubstantial hands to what he hoped would hold him,
save him, arrest himiEllen (do you mark them?), myself, then last 0 f
all that fatherless daughter 0 f Wash Jones' only child who, so I heard
once, died in a Memphis brothelito find severance (even i f not rest and
peace) at last in the stroke 0 f a rusty scythe. l was told, informed of
that too, though not by Jones this time but by someone else kind enough
to turn aside and tell me he was dead. 'Dead?â I cried. âDead? You? You
lie; you're not dead; heaven cannot, and hell dare not, have you!â But
Quentin was not listening, because there was also something which he too
could not passithat door, the running feet on the stairs beyond it
almost a continuation of the faint shot, the two women, the negress and
the white girl in her underthings (made of flour sacking when there had
been flour, of window curtains when not) pausing, looking at the door,
the yellowed creamy mass of old intricate satin and lace spread
carefully on the bed and then caught swiftly up by the white girl and
held before her as the door crashed in and the brother stood there,
hatless, with his shaggy bayonetitrimmed hair, his gaunt worn unshaven
face, his patched and faded gray tunic, the pistol still hanging against
his flank: the two of them, brother and sister, curiously alike as if
the difference in sex had merely sharpened the common blood to a
terrific, an almost unbearable, similarity, speaking to one another in
short brief staccato sentences like slaps, as if they stood breast to
breast striking one another in turn, neither making any attempt to guard
against the blows: Now you cant marry him. Why cant I marry him? Because
he's dead. Dead? 139

Page 129

Yes. I killed him. He (Quentin) couldn't pass that. He was not even
listening to her; he said, "Ma'am? What's that? What did you say?"
"There's something in that house." "In that house? It's Clytie. Dont she

Hidden in it. It has been out there for
four years, living hidden in that house."

"No. Something living in it.

Page 130

derment and dread it has been taught to regard as an irrevocable and
unplumbable finality, 1 do not know it. And if there can be either
access 0 f comfort or cessation of pain in the ultimate escape from a
stubborn and amazed outrage which over a period of fortyithree years has
been companionship and bread and fire and all, l do not know that
either* *bringing with it that very September evening itself (and he
soon needing, required, to say "No, neither aunt cousin nor uncle Rosa.
Miss Rosa. Miss Rosa Coldfield, an old lady that died young of outrage
in 1866 one summer" and then Shreve, "You mean she was no kin to you, no
kin to you at all, that there was actually one Southern Bayard or
Guinevere who was no kin to you? then what did she die for?" and that
not Shreve's first time, nobody's first time in Cambridge since
September : Tell about the South. What's it like there. What do they do
there. Why do they live there. Why do they live at all)*that very
September evening when Mr Compson stopped talking at last, he (Quentin)
walked out of his father's talking at last because it was now time to
go, not because he had heard it all because he had not been listening
since he had something which he still was unable to pass: that door,
that gaunt tragic dramatic selfihypnotised youthful face like the
tragedian in a college play, an academic Hamlet waked from some
trancement of the curtain's falling and blundering across the dusty
stage from which the rest of the cast had departed last commencement,
the sister facing him across the wedding dress which she was not to use,
not even to finish, the two of them slashing at one another with twelve
or fourteen words and most of these the same words repeated two or three
times so that when you boiled it down they did it with eight or ten. And
she (Miss Coldfield) had on the shawl, as he had known she would, and
the bonnet (black once but faded now to that fierce muted metallic green
of old peacock feathers) and the black reticule almost as large as a
carpet bag containing all the keys which the house possessed: cupboard
closet and door, some of which would not even turn in locks which, shot
home, could be solved by any child with a hairpin or a wad of chewing
gum, some of which no longer even fit the locks they had been made for
like old married people who no longer have anything in common, to do or
i4z

Page 131

to talk about, save the same general weight of air to displace and
breathe and general oblivious biding earth to bear their weight; that
evening, the twelve miles behind the fat mare in the moonless September
dust, the trees along the road not rising soaring as trees should but
squatting like huge fowl, their leaves ruffled and heavily separate like
the feathers of panting fowls, heavy with sixty days of dust, the
roadside undergrowth coated with heativulcanised dust and, seen through
the dustcloud in which the horse and buggy moved, appeared like masses
stranding delicate and rigid and immobly upward at perpendicular's
absolute in some old dead volcanic water refined to the oxygenless first
principle of liquid, the dustcloud in which the buggy moved not blowing
away because it had been raised by no wind and was supported by no air
but evoked, materialised about them, instantaneous and eternal, cubic
foot for cubic foot of dust to cubic foot for cubic foot of horse and
buggy, peripatetic beneath the branchishredded vistas of flat black
fiercely and heavily starred sky, the dustcloud moving on, enclosing
them with not threat exactly but maybe warning, bland, almost friendly,
warning, as if to say, Come on i f you like. But I will get there first;
accumulating ahead of you I will arrive first, lifting, sloping gently
upward under hooves and wheels so that you will find no destination but
will merely abrupt gently onto a plateau and a panorama o f harmless and
inscrutable night and there will be nothing for you to do but return and
so I would advise you not to go, to turn back now and let what is, be;
he (Quentin) agreeing to this, sitting in the buggy beside the
implacable dollisized old woman clutching her cotton umbrella, smelling
the heatidistilled old woman* flesh, the heatidistilled camphor in the
old foldicreases of the shawl, feeling exactly like an electric bulb
blood and skin since the buggy disturbed not enough air to cool him with
motion, created not enough motion within him to make his skin sweat,
thinking Good Lord yes, let's dont find him or it, try to find him or
it, risk disturbing him or it: (then Shreve again, "Wait. Wait. You mean
that this old gal, this Aunt Rosa "Miss Rosa," Quentin said. "All right
all right. that this old dame, this Aunt Rosa "Miss Rosa, I tell you."
"All right all right all right. that this old this Aunt R All 143

Page 132

right all right all right all right. that hadn't been out there, hadn't
set foot in the house even in fortyithree years, yet who not only said
there was somebody hidden in it but found somebody that would believe
her, would drive that twelve miles out there in a buggy at midnight to
see if she was right or not?" "Yes," Quentin said. "That this old dame
that grew up in a household like an overpopulated mausoleum, with no
call or claim on her time but the hating of her father and aunt and her
sister's husband in peace and comfort and waiting for the day when they
would prove not only to themselves but to everybody else that she had
been right: so one night the aunt slid down the rainpipe with a horse
trader and she was right about the aunt so that fixed that: then her
father nailed himself up in the attic to keep from being drafted into
the Rebel army and starved to death so that fixed that except for the
unavoidable possibility that when the moment came for him to admit to
himself that she had been right he may not have been able to speak or
may not have had anyone to tell it to: so she was right about the father
too since if he hadn't made General Lee and Jeff Davis mad he wouldn't
have had to nail himself up and die and if he hadn't died he wouldn't
have left her an orphan and a pauper and so situated, left susceptible
to a situation where she could receive this mortal affront: and right
about the brotheriinilaw because if he hadn't been a demon his children
wouldn't have needed protection from him and she wouldn't have had to go
out there and be betrayed by the old meat and find instead of a widowed
Agamemnon to her Cassandra an ancient stiffijointed Pyramus to her eager
though untried Thisbe who could approach her in this unbidden April's
compounded demonry and suggest that they breed together for test and
sample and if it was a boy they would marry; would not have had to be
blown back to town on the initial blast of that horror and outrage to
eat of gall and wormwood stolen through paling fences at dawn: so this
was not fixed at all and forever because she couldn't even tell it
because of who her successor was, not because he found a successor by
just turning around and no day's loss of time even but because of who
the successor was, that she might conceivably have ever suffered a
situation where she could or would have to decline any office which her
successor could have been 144

Page 133

in their progeny the brittle bones and tired flesh of an old man against
the day when the Creditor would run him to earth for the last time and
he couldn't get away: and so sure enough the daughter fell in love, the
son the agent for the providing of that living bulwark between him (the
demon) and the Creditor's bailiff hand until the son should marry and
thus insure him doubled and compoundediand then the demon must turn
square around and run not only the fiance out of the house and not only
the son out of the house but so corrupt seduce and mesmerise the son
that he (the son) should do the office of the outraged father's
pistolihand when fornication threatened: so that the demon should return
from the war five years later and find accomplished and complete the
situation he had been working for: son fled for good now with a noose
behind him, daughter doomed to spinsterhoodiand then almost before his
foot was out of the stirrup he not only set out to try to restore his
plantation to what it used to be, like maybe he was hoping to fool the
Creditor by illusion and obfuscation by concealing behind the illusion
that time and change had not elapsed and occurred the fact that he was
now almost sixty years old until he could get himself a new batch of
children to bulwark him, but chose for this purpose the last woman on
earth he might have hoped to prevail on, this Aunt R fall right all
right all right.*that hated him, that had always hated him, yet choosing
her with a kind of outrageous bravado as if a kind of despairing
conviction of his irresistibility or invulnerability were a part of the
price he had got for whatever it was he had sold the Creditor since
according to the old dame he never had had a soul; proposed to her and
was acceptedithen three months later, with no date ever set for the
wedding and marriage itself not mentioned ore 146

Page 134

time since, and on the very day when he established definitely that he
would be able to keep at least some of his land and how much, he
approached her and suggested they breed like a couple of dogs together,
inventing with fiendish cunning the thing which husbands and fiances
have been trying to invent for ten million years: the thing that without
harming her or giving her grounds for civil or tribal action would not
only blast the little dreamiwoman out of the dovecote but leave her
irrevocably husbanded (and himself, husband or fiance, already safely
cuckolded before she can draw breath) with the abstract carcass of
outrage and revenge; who said it and was free now, forever more now of
threat or meddling from anyone since he had at last eliminated the last
member of his late wife's family, free now: son fled to Texas or
California or maybe even South America, daughter doomed to spinsterhood
to live until he died, since after that it wouldn't matter, in that
rotting house, caring for him and feeding him, raising chickens and
peddling the eggs for the clothes she and Clytie couldn't make: so that
he didn't even need to be a demon now but just mad impotent old man who
had realised at last that his dream of restoring his Sutpen's Hundred
was not only vain but that what he had left of it would never support
him and his family and so running his little crossroads store with a
stock of plowshares and hame strings and calico and kerosene and cheap
beads and ribbons and a clientele of freed niggers and (what is it? the
word? white what?7Yes, trash) with Jones for clerk and who knows maybe
what delusions of making money out of the store to rebuild the
plantation ; who had escaped twice now, got himself into it and been
freed by the Creditor who set his children to destroying one another
before he had posterity, and he decided that maybe he was wrong in being
free and so got into it again and then decided that he was wrong in
being unfree and so got out of it againiand then turned right around and
bought his way back into it with beads and calico and striped candy out
of his own showcase and off his shelves?" "Yes," Quentin said. He sounds
just like Father he thought, glancing (his face quiet, reposed,
curiously almost sullen) for a moment at Shreve leaning forward into the
lamp, his naked torso pinkigleaming and baby* smooth, cherubic, almost
hairless, the twin moons of his spectacles glinting against his moonlike
rubicund face, smelling (Quentin) the 147

Page 135

cigar and the wistaria, seeing the fireflies blowing and winking in the
September dusk. Just exactly like Father i f Father had known as much
about it the night before 1 went out there as he did the day after 1
came back thinking Mad impotent old man who realised at last that there
must be some limit even to the capabilities of a demon for doing harm,
who must have seen his situation as that o f the show girl, the pony,
who realises that the principal tune she prances to comes not from horn
and fiddle and drum but from a clock and calendar, must have seen
himself as the old womout cannon which realises that it can deliver just
one more fierce shot and crumble to dust in its own furious blast and
recoil, who looked about upon the scene which was still within his scope
and compass and saw son gone, vanished, more insuperable to him now than
if the son were dead since now (if the son still lived) his name would
be different and those to call him by it strangers and whatever dragon's
outcropping of Sutpen blood the son might sow on the body 0 f whatever
strange woman would therefore carry on the tradition, accomplish the
hereditary evil and harm under another name and upon and among people
who will never have heard the right one; daughter doomed to spinsterhood
who had chosen spinsterhood already before there was anyone named
Charles Bon since the aunt who came to succor her in bereavement and
sorrow found neither but instead that calm absolutely impenetrable face
between a homespun dress and sunbonnet seen before a closed door and
again in a cloudy swirl o f chickens while Jones was building the coffin
and which she wore during the next year while the aunt lived there and
the three women wove their own garments and raised their own food and
cut the wood they cooked it with (excusing what help they had from Jones
who lived with his granddaughter in the abandoned fishing camp with its
collapsing roof and rotting porch against which the rusty scythe which
Sutpen was to lend him, make him borrow to cut away the weeds from the
dooriand at last forced him to use though not to cut weeds, at least not
vegetable weeds *would lean for two years) and wore still after the
aunt's indignation had swept her back to town to live on stolen garden
truck and out o f anonymous baskets left on her front steps at night,
the three of them, the two daughters negro and white and the aunt twelve
miles away watching from her distance as the two daughters watched from
theirs the old demon, the ancient varicose and despairing Faustus fling
his final main now with the 148

Page 136

Creditor's hand already on his shoulder, running his little country
store now for his bread and meat, haggling tediously over nickels and
dimes with rapacious and povertyistricken whites and negroes, who at one
time could have galloped for ten miles in any direction without crossing
his own boundary, using out of his meagre stock the cheap ribbons and
beads and the stale violentlyicolored candy with which even an old man
can seduce a fifteeniyeariold country girl, to ruin the granddaughter o
f his partner, this Jonesithis gangling malariairidden white man whom he
had given permission fourteen years ago to squat in the abandoned
fishing camp with the yeariold grandchildiJones, partner porter and
clerk who at the demon's command removed with his own hand (and maybe
delivered too) from the showcase the candy beads and ribbons, measured
the very cloth from which Judith (who had not been bereaved and did not
mourn) helped the granddaughter to fashion a dress to walk past the
lounging men in, the sideilooking and the tongues, until her increasing
belly taught her embarrassmentior perhaps fear;*Jones who before '61 had
not even been allowed to approach the front of the house and who during
the next four years got no nearer than the kitchen door and that only
when he brought the game and fish and vegetables on which the
seduceritoibe's wife and daughter (and Clytie too, the one remaining
servant, negro, the one who would forbid him to pass the kitchen door
with what he brought) depended on to keep life in them, but who now
entered the house itself on the (quite frequent now) afternoons when the
demon would suddenly curse the store empty of customers and lock the
door and repair to the rear and in the same tone in which he used to
address his orderly or even his house servants when he had them (and in
which he doubtless ordered Jones to fetch from the showcase the ribbons
and beads and candy) direct Jones to fetch the jug, the two of them (and
Jones even sitting now who in the old days, the old dead Sunday
afternoons o f monotonous peace which they spent beneath the scuppernong
arbor in the back yard, the demon lying in the hammock while Jones
squatted against a post, rising from time to time to pour for the demon
from the demijohn and the bucket of spring water which he had fetched
from the spring more than a mile away then squatting again, chortling
and chuckling and saying âSho, Mister Tawm' each time the demon
paused)*the two 0 f them drinking turn and turn about from the jug and
149

Page 137

the demon not lying down now nor even sitting but reaching after the
third or second drink that old man's state of impotent and furious
undefeat in which he would rise, swaying and plunging and shouting for
his horse and pistols to ride singleihanded into Washington and shoot
Lincoln (a year or so too late here) and Sherman both, shouting, 'Kill
them! Shoot them down like the dogs they are!â and Jones: 'Sho, Kernel;
sho now' and catching him as he fell and commandeering the first passing
wagon to take him to the house and carry him up the front steps and
through the paintless formal door beneath its fanlight imported pane by
pane from Europe which Judith held open for him to enter with no change,
no alteration in that calm frozen face which she had worn for four years
now, and on up the stairs and into the bedroom and put him to bed like a
baby and then lie down himself on the floor beside the bed though not to
sleep since before dawn the man on the bed would stir and groan and
Jones would say, 'flyer I am, Kernel. Hit's all right. They aint whupped
us yit, air they? :this Jones who after the demon rode away with the
regiment when the granddaughter was only eight years old would tell
people that he 'was lookin after Major's place and niggers' even before
they had time to ask him why he was not with the troops and perhaps in
time came to believe the lie himself, who was among the first to greet
the demon when he returned, to meet him at the gate and say, 'Well,
Kernel, they kilt us but they aint whupped us yit, air they?â who even
worked, labored, sweat at the demon's behest during that first furious
period while the demon believed he could restore by sheer indomitable
willing the Sutpen's Hundred which he remembered and had lost, labored
with no hope of pay or reward who must have seen long before the demon
did (or would admit it) that the task was hopelessiblind Jones who
apparently saw still in that furious lecherous wreck the old fine figure
of the man who once galloped on the black thoroughbred about that domain
two boundaries of which the eye could not see from any point "Yes,"
Quentin said. So that Sunday morning came and the demon up and away
before dawn, Judith thinking she knew why since that morning the black
stallion which he rode to Virginia and led back had a son born on his
wife Penelope, only it was not that foal which the demon had got up
early to look at and it was almost a week before they caught, found, the
old i50

Page 138

and then he looked at the girl on the pallet again and said, 'Well,
Milly; too bad you're not a mare too. Then I could give you a decent
stall in the stable' and turned and went out and the old negress
squatted there and heard them, the voices, he and Jones: âStand back.
Dont you touch me, Wash.'*l'm going to tech you, Kernel' and she heard
the whip too though not the scythe, no whistling air, no blow, nothing
since always that which merely consummates punishment evokes a cry while
that which evokes the last silence occurs in silence. And that night
they finally found him and fetched him home in a wagon and carried him,
quiet and bloody and with his teeth still showing in his parted beard
(which was hardly grizzled although his hair was almost white now) in
the light 0 f the lanterns and the pine torches, up the steps where the
tearless and stones faced daughter held the door open for him too who
used to like to drive fast to church and who rode fast there this time,
only when it was all over he had never reached the church since the
daughter (the woman of thirty now and looking older, not as the weak
grow old, either enclosed in a static ballooning of already lifeless
flesh or through a series of stages of gradual collapsing whose
particles adhere not to some iron and still impervious framework but to
one another as though in some communal and oblivious and mindless life
of their own like a colony o f maggots, but as the demon himself had
grown old: with a kind of condensation, an anguished emergence of the
primary indomitable ossification which the soft color and texture, the
light electric aura of youth, had merely temporarily assuaged but never
concealedithe spinster in homemade and shapeless clothing, with hands
which could either transfer eggs or hold a plow straight in furrow)
decided that he should be driven in to that same Methodist church in
town where he had married her mother before returning to the grave in
the cedar grove, who borrowed two halfiwild young mules to pull the
wagon: so he rode fast toward church as far as he went, in his homemade
coffin, in his regimentals and sabre and embroidered gauntlets, until
the young mules bolted and turned the wagon over and tumbled him, sabre
plumes and all, into a ditch from 151

Page 139

even seen *she and Henry both knowing that she would observe the
probation, give him (Henry) the benefit of that interval, only up to
that mutually recognised though unstated and undefined point and both
doubtless aware that when that point was reached she would, and with the
same calm, the same refusal to accept or give because of any traditional
weakness of sex, recall the armistice and face him as a foe, not
requiring or even wishing that Bon be present to support her, doubtless
even refusing to allow him to intervene if he were, fighting the matter
out with Henry like a man first before consenting to revert to the
woman, the loved, the bride. And Bon: Henry would have no more told Bon
what his father had told him than he would have returned to his father
and told him that Bon denied it, since to do one he would have to do the
other and he knew that Bon's denial would be a lie and though he could
have borne Bon's lie himself, he could not have borne for either Judith
or his father to hear it. Besides, Henry would not need to tell Bon what
had happened. Bon must have learned of Sutpen's visit to New Orleans as
soon as he (Bon) reached home that first summer. He must have known that
Sutpen now knew his secretiif Bon, until he saw Sutpen's reaction to it,
ever looked upon it as a cause for secrecy, certainly not 73

Page 140

beyond which, would be the oak grove and the gray huge rotting deserted
house half a mile away. Mr Compson had stopped to look back at Luster on
the mule, the towsack he had been using for saddle now wrapped around
his head, his knees drawn up under it, leading the horses on down the
ditch to find a place to cross. "Better get on out of the rain," Mr
Compson said. "He's not going to come within a hundred yards of those

cedars anyway. They went on up the slope. They could not see the two
dogs at all, only the steady furrowing of the sedge where, invisible,
the dogs quartered the slope until one of them flung up his head to look
back. Mr Compson gestured with his hand toward the trees, he and Quentin
following. It was dark among the cedars, the light more dark than gray
even, the quiet rain, the faint pearly globules, materialising on the
gun barrels and the five headstones like drops of notiquiteicongealed
meltings from cold candles on the marble: the two flat heavy vaulted
slabs, the other three headstones leaning a little awry, with here and
there a carved letter or even an entire word momentary and legible in
the faint light which the raindrops brought particle by particle into
the gloom and released; now the two dogs came in, drifted in like smoke,
their hair closeiplastered with damp, and curled down in one
indistinguishable and apparently inextricable ball for warmth. Both the
flat slabs were cracked across the middle by their own weight (and
vanishing into the hole where the brick coping of one vault had fallen
in was a smooth faint path worn by some small animalipossum probablyiby
generations of some small animal since there could have been nothing to
eat in the grave for a long time) though the lettering was quite
legible: Ellen Cold field Sutpen. Born October 9, 1817. Died January 23,
1863 and the other: Thomas Sutpen, Colonel, 23rd Mississippi Tnfantry,
C.S.A. Died August 12, 1869: this last, the date, added later, crudely
with a chisel, who even dead did not divulge where and when he had been
born. Quentin looked at the stones quietly, thinking Not beloved wife
of. No. Ellen Coldfield Sutpen "I wouldn't have thought they would have
had any money to buy marble with in 1869," he said. "He bought them
himself," Mr Compson said. "He bought the two of them while the regiment
was in Virginia, after Judith got word to him that her mother was dead.
He ordered them from Italy, the best, the 153

Page 141

finest to be hadihis wife's complete and his with the date left blank:
and this a plow straight in furrow) decided that he should be driven in
to that same Methodist church in town where he had married her mother
before returning to the grave in the cedar grove, who borrowed two
halfiwild young mules to pull the wagon: so he rode fast toward church
as far as he went, in his homemade coffin, in his regimentals and sabre
and embroidered gauntlets, until the young mules bolted and turned the
wagon over and tumbled him, sabre plumes and all, into a ditch from 151

Page 142

doubtless here too) reading among the lettering more of maiden hope and
virgin expectation than she ever told Quentin about, since she never
mentioned the stone to him at all, and (the demon) drank the parched
corn coffee and ate the hoe cake which Judith and Clytie prepared for
him and kissed Judith on the forehead and said, âWell, Clytie' and
returned to the war, all in twentyifour hours; he could see it; he might
even have been there. Then he thought No. If I had been there I could
not have seen it this plain "But that dont explain the other three," he
said. "They must have cost something too." "Who would have paid for
them?" Mr Compson said. Quentin could feel him looking at him. "Think."
Quentin looked at the three identical headstones with their faint
identical lettering, slanted a little in the soft loamy decay of
accumulated cedar needles, these decipherable too when he looked close,
the first one: Charles Bon. Born in New Orleans, Louisiana. Died at
Sutpen's Hundred, Mississippi, May 3, 1865. Aged 33 years and 5 months.
He could feel his father watching him. "She did it," he said. "With that
money she got when she sold the store." "Yes," Mr Compson said. Quentin
had to stoop and brush away some of the cedar needles to read the next
one. As he did so one of the dogs rose and approached him, thrusting its
head in to see what he was looking at like a human being would, as if
from association with human beings it had acquired the quality of
curiosity which is an attribute only of men and apes. "Get away," he
said, thrusting the dog back with one hand while with the other he
brushed the cedar needles away, smoothing with his hand into legibility
the faint lettering, the graved words: Charles Etienne Sainti Valery
Bon. 185971884 feeling his father watching him, remarking before he rose
that the third stone bore that same date, 1884. "It couldn't have been
the store this time," he said. "Because she sold the store in '70, and
besides 1884 is the same date that's on hers" thinking how it would have
been terrible for her sure enough if she had wanted to put Beloved
Husband of on that first one. "Ah," Mr Compson said. "That was the one
your grandfather attended to. Judith came into town one day and brought
him the money, 155

Page 143

some of it, where she got it from he never knew, unless it was what she
had left out of the price of the store which he sold for her; brought
the money in with the inscription (except the date of death of course)
all written out as you see it, during that three weeks while Clytie was
in New Orleans finding the boy to fetch him back though your grandfather
of course did not know this, money and inscription not for herself but
for him." "Oh," Quentin said. "Yes. They lead beautiful livesiwomen.
Lives not only divorced from, but irrevocably excommunicated from, all
reality. That's why although their deaths, the instant of dissolution,
are of no importance to them since they have a courage and fortitude in
the face of pain and annihilation which would make the most spartan man
resemble a puling boy, yet to them their funerals and graves, the little
puny affirmations of spurious immortality set above their slumber, are
of incalculable importance. You had an aunt once (you do not remember
her because I never saw her myself but only heard the tale) who was
faced with a serious operation which she became convinced she would not
survive, at a time when her nearest female kin was a woman between whom
and herself there had existed for years one of those bitter inexplicable
(to the man mind) amicable enmities which occur between women of the
same blood, whose sole worry about departing this world was to get rid
of a certain brown dress which she owned and knew that the kinswoman
knew she had never liked, which must be burned, not given away but
burned in the back yard beneath the window where, by being held up to
the window (and suffering excruciating pain) she could see it burned
with her own eyes, because she was convinced that after she died the
kinswoman, the logical one to take charge, would bury her in it." "And
did she die?" Quentin said. "No. As soon as the dress was consumed she
began to mend. She stood the operation and recovered and outlived the
kinswoman by several years. Then one afternoon she died peacefully of no
particular ailment and was buried in her wedding gown." "Oh," Quentin
said. "Yes. But there was one afternoon in the summer of '70 when one of
these graves (there were only three here then) was actually watered 156

Page 144

by tears. Your grandfather saw it; that was the year Judith sold the
store and your grandfather attended to it for her and he had ridden out
to see her about the matter and he witnessed it: the interlude, the
ceremonial widowhood's bright dramatic pageantry. He didn't know at the
time how the octoroon came to be here, how Judith could even have known
about her to write her where Bon was dead. But there she was, with the
eleveniyeariold boy who looked more like eight. It must have resembled a
garden scene by the Irish poet, Wilde: the late afternoon, the dark
cedars with the level sun in them, even the light exactly right and the
graves, the three pieces of marble (your grandfather had advanced Judith
the money to buy the third stone with against the price of the store)
looking as though they had been cleaned and polished and arranged by
scene shifters who with the passing of twilight would return and strike
them and carry them, hollow fragile and without weight, back to the
warehouse until they should be needed again; the pageant, the scene, the
act, entering upon the stageithe magnoliaifaced woman a little plumper
now, a woman created of by and for darkness whom the artist Beardsley
might have dressed, in a soft flowing gown designed not to infer
bereavement or widowhood but to dress some interlude of slumbrous and
fatal insatiation, of passionate and inexorable hunger of the flesh,
walking beneath a lace parasol and followed by a bright gigantic negress
carrying a silk cushion and leading by the hand the little boy whom
Beardsley might not only have dressed but drawnia thin delicate child
with a smooth ivory sexless face who, after his mother handed the
negress the parasol and took the cushion and knelt beside the grave and
arranged her skirts and wept, never released the negress' apron but
stood blinking quietly who, having been born and lived all his life in a
kind of silken prison lighted by perpetual shaded candles, breathing for
air the milklike and absolutely physical lambence which his mother's
days and hours emanated, had seen little enough of sunlight before, let
alone outiofidoors, trees and grass and earth; and last of all, the
other woman, Judith (who, not bereaved, did not need to mourn Quentin
thought, thinking Yes, I have had to listen too long) who stood just
inside the cedars, in the calico dress and the sunbonnet to match it,
both faded and shapelessithe calm face, the hands which could plow or
cut wood and cook or weave cloth folded before her, standing in the
attitude of 157

Page 145

an indifferent guide in a museum, waiting, probably not even watching.
Then the negress came and handed the octoroon a crystal bottle to smell
and helped her to rise and took up the silk cushion and gave the
octoroon the parasol and they returned to the house, the little boy
still holding to the negress' apron, the negress supporting the woman
with one arm and Judith following with that face like a mask or like
marble, back to the house, across the tall scaling portico and into the
house where Clytie was cooking the eggs and the cornbread on which she
and Judith lived. "She stayed a week. She passed the rest of that week
in the one remaining room in the house whose bed had linen sheets,
passed it in bed, in the new lace and silk and satin negligees subdued
to the mauve and lilac of mourningithat room airless and shuttered,
impregnated behind the sagging closed blinds with the heavy fainting
odor of her flesh, her days, her hours, her garments, of eauideicologne
from the cloth upon her temples, of the crystal phial which the negress
alternated with the fan as she sat beside the bed between trips to the
door to receive the trays which Clytie carried up the stairsiiclytie,
who did that fetching and carrying as Judith made her, who must have
perceived whether Judith told her or not that it was another negro whom
she served, yet who served the negress just as she would quit the
kitchen from time to time and search the rooms downstairs until she
found that little strange lonely boy sitting quietly on a straight hard
chair in the dim and shadowy library or parlor, with his four names and
his sixteenthipart black blood and his expensive esoteric Fauntleroy
clothing who regarded with an aghast fatalistic terror the grim
coffeeicolored woman who would come on bare feet to the door and look in
at him, who gave him not teacakes but the coarsest cornbread spread with
as coarse molasses (this surreptitiously , not that the mother or the
duenna might object, but because the household did not have food for
eating between meals), gave it to him, thrust it at him with restrained
savageness, and who found him one afternoon playing with a negro boy
about his own size in the road outside the gates and cursed the negro
child out of sight with level and deadly violence and sent him, the
other, back to the house in a voice the very absence from which of
vituperation or rage made it seem just that much more deadly and cold.
"Yes, Clytie, who stood impassive beside the wagon on that last day, l
58

Page 146

even care: death or elopement or marriage: who would not grow from one
metamorphosis 7dissolution or adulteryito the next carrying along with
her all the old accumulated rubbishiyears which we call memory, the
recognisable I, but changing from phase to phase as the butterfly
changes once the cocoon is cleared, carrying nothing of what was into
what is, leaving nothing of what is behind but eliding complete and
intact and unresisting into the next avatar as the overblown rose or
magnolia elides from one rich June to the next, leaving no bones, no
substance, no dust of whatever dead pristine soulless rich surrender
anywhere between sun and earth) but produced complete and subject to no
microbe in that cloyed and scented maze of shuttered silk as if he were
the delicate and perverse spiritisymbol, immortal page of the ancient
immortal Lilith, entering the actual world not at the age of one second
but of twelve years, the delicate garments of his pagehood already half
concealed 159

Page 147

beneath that harsh and shapeless denim cut to an iron pattern and sold
by the millionsithat burlesque uniform and regalia of the tragic
burlesque of the sons of Ham;7a slight silent child who could not even
speak English, picked suddenly up out of whatever debacle the only life
he knew had disintegrated into, by a creature whom he had seen once and
learned to dread and fear yet could not flee, held helpless and passive
in a state which must have been some incredible compound of horror and
trust, since although he could not even talk to her (they made, they
must have made, that week's journey by steamboat among the cotton bales
on the freight deck, eating and sleeping with negroes, where he could
not even tell his companion when he was hungry or when he had to relieve
himself) and so could have only suspected, surmised, where she was
taking him, could have known nothing certainly except that all he had
ever been familiar with was vanishing about him like smoke, yet he made
no resistance, returning quietly and docilely to that decaying house
which he had seen one time, where the fierce brooding woman who had come
and got him lived with the calm white one who was not even fierce, who
was not anything except calm, who to him did not even have a name yet
who was somehow so closely related to him as to be the owner of the one
spot on earth where he had ever seen his mother weep; returned, crossed
that strange threshold, that irrevocable demarcation, not led, not
dragged, but driven and herded by that stern implacable presence, into
that gaunt and barren household where his very silken remaining clothes,
his delicate shirt and stockings and shoes which still remained to
remind him of what he had once been, vanished, fled from arms and body
and legs as if they had been woven of chimaeras or of smoke.7Yes,
sleeping in the trundle bed beside Judith's, beside that of the woman
who looked upon him and treated him with a cold unbending detached
gentleness more discouraging than the fierce ruthless constant
guardianship of the negress who, with a sort of invincible spurious
humility slept on a pallet on the floor, the child lying there between
them unasleep in some hiatus of passive and hopeless despair aware of
this, aware of the woman on the bed whose every look and action toward
him, whose every touch of the capable hands seemed at the moment of
touching his body to lose all warmth and become imbued with cold
implacable antipathy, and the woman on the pallet upon whom he had 1 6o

Page 148

already come to look as might some delicate talonless and fangless wild
beast crouched in its cage in some hopeless and desperate similitude of
ferocity (and your grandfather said, 'Suffer little children to come
unto Me': and what did He mean by that? how, if He meant that little
children should need to be suffered to approach Him, what sort of earth
had He created; that if they had to suffer in order to approach Him,
what sort of heaven did He have?) look upon the human creature who feeds
it, who fed him, thrust food which he himself could discern to be the
choicest of what they had, food which he realised had been prepared for
him by deliberate sacrifice, with that curious blend of savageness and
pity, of yearning and hatred, who dressed him and washed him, thrust him
into tubs of water too hot or too cold yet against which he dared make
no outcry, and scrubbed him with harsh rags and soap, sometimes
scrubbing at him with repressed fury as if she were trying to wash the
smooth faint olive tinge from his skin as you might watch a child
scrubbing at a wall long after the epithet, the chalked insult, has been
obliterated; lying there unsleeping in the dark between them, feeling
them unasleep too, feeling them thinking about him, projecting about him
and filling the thunderous solitude of his despair louder than speech
could: You are not up here in this bed with me, where through no fault
nor willing of your own you must and will be, not through any fault or
willing of our own who would not what we cannot just as we will and wait
for what must be. "And your grandfather did not know either just which
of them it was who told him that he was, must be, a negro, who could
neither have heard yet nor recognised the term 'nigger', who even had no
word for it in the tongue he knew who had been born and grown up in a
padded silken vacuum cell which might have been suspended on a cable a
thousand fathoms in the sea, where pigmentation had no more moral value
than the silk walls and the scent and the roseicolored candle shades,
where the very abstractions which he might have observed* monogamy and
fidelity and decorum and gentleness and affection* were as purely rooted
in the flesh's offices as the digestive processes. Your grandfather did
not know if he was sent from the trundle bed at last or if he quitted it
by his own wish and will; if when the time came when l 61

Page 149

his loneliness and grief became calloused, he retired himself from
Judith's bedroom or was sent from it, to sleep in the hall (where Clytie
had likewise moved her pallet) though not on a pallet like her but on a
cot, elevated still and perhaps not by Judith's decree either but by the
negress' fierce inexorable spurious humility; and then in the attic, the
cot moved there, the few garments (the rags of the silk and broadcloth
in which he had arrived, the harsh jeans and homespun which the two
women bought and made for him, he accepting them with no thanks, no
comment, accepting his garret room with no thanks, no comment, asking
for and making no alteration in its spartan arrangements that they knew
of until that second year when he was fourteen and one of them, Clytie
or Judith, found hidden beneath his mattress the shard of broken mirror:
and who to know what hours of amazed and tearless grief he might have
spent before it, examining himself in the delicate and outgrown tatters
in which he perhaps could not even remember himself, with quiet and
incredulous incomprehension) hanging behind a curtain contrived of a
piece of old carpet nailed across a corner. And Clytie sleeping in the
hall below, barring the foot of the attic stairs, guarding his escape or
exit as inexorably as a Spanish duenna, teaching him to chop wood and to
work the garden and then to plow as his strength (his resiliency rather,
since he would never be other than light in the bone and almost
delicate) increasedithe boy with his light bones and womanish hands
struggling with what anonymous avatar of intractable Mule, whatever
tragic and barren clown was his bound fellow and complement beneath his
first father's curse, getting the hang of it gradually and the two of
them, linked by the savage steeliandiwood male symbol, ripping from the
prone rich female earth corn to feed them both while Clytie watched,
never out of sight of him, with that brooding fierce unflagging jealous
care, hurrying out whenever anyone white or black stopped in the road as
if to wait for the boy to complete the furrow and pause long enough to
be spoken to, sending the boy on with a single quiet word or even
gesture a hundred times more fierce than the level murmur of
vituperation with which she drove the passerby on. So he (your
grandfather ) believed that it was neither of them. Not Clytie, who
guarded him as if he were a Spanish virgin, who even before she could
have even suspected that he would ever come there to live, had
interrupted his first 1 62

Page 150

contact with a nigger and sent him back to the house; not Judith, who
could have refused at any time to let him sleep in that white child's
bed in her room, who even if she could not have reconciled herself to
his sleeping on the floor could have forced Clytie to take him into
another bed with her, who would have made a monk, a celibate, of him
perhaps yet not a eunuch, who may not have permitted him to pass himself
for a foreigner, yet who certainly would not have driven him to consort
with negroes. Your grandfather didn't know, even though he did know more
than the town, the countryside, knew, which was that there was a strange
little boy living out there who had apparently emerged from the house
for the first time at the age of about twelve years, whose presence was
not even unaccountable to the town and county since they now believed
they knew why Henry had shot Bon and they wondered only where and how
Clytie and Judith had managed to keep him concealed all the time,
believing now that it had been a widow who had buried Bon even though
she had no paper to show for it, and only the incredulous (and shocked)
speculation of your grandfather who, though he had that ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 151

sling and his head bandaged since they had taken him to the doctor
first, your grandfather gradually learning what had happened or as much
of it as he could since the Court itself couldn't get very much out of
the witnesses, the ones who had fled and sent for the sheriff, the ones
(excepting that one whom he had injured too badly to be present) with
whom he had foughtia negro ball held in a cabin a few miles from
Sutpen's Hundred and he there, present and your grandfather never to
know how often he had done this before, whether he had gone there to
engage in the dancing or for the dice game in progress in the kitchen
where the trouble started, trouble which he and not the negroes started
according to the witnesses and for no reason, no accusation of cheating,
nothing; and he making no denial, saying nothing, refusing to speak at
all, sitting there sullen pale and silent: so that at this point all
truth, evidence vanished into a moiling clump of negro backs and heads
and black arms and hands clutching sticks of stove wood and cooking
implements and razors, the white man the focal point of it and using a
knife which he had produced from somewhere, clumsily, with obvious lack
of skill and practice, yet with deadly earnestness and a strength which
his slight build denied, a strength composed of sheer desperate will and
imperviousness to the punishment, the blows and slashes which he took in
return and did not even seem to feel; no cause, no reason for it; none
to ever know exactly what happened, what curses and ejaculations which
might have indicated what it was that drove him and only your
grandfather to fumble, grope, grasp the presence of that furious
protest, that indictment of heaven's ordering, that gage flung into the
face of what is with a furious and indomitable desperation which the
demon himself might have shown, as if the child and then the youth had
acquired it from the walls in which the demon had lived, the air which
he had once walked in and breathed until that moment when his own fate
which he had dared in his turn struck back at him; only your grandfather
to sense that because the justice and the others present did not
recognise him, did not recognise this slight man with his bandaged head
and arm, his sullen impassive (and now bloodless) olive face, who
refused to answer any questions, make any statement: so that the justice
(Jim Hamblett it was) was already making his speech of indictment when
your grandfather entered, utilising opportunity and audience to orate,
his eyes already 1 64

Page 152

glazed with that cessation of vision of people who like to hear
themselves talk in public: 'At this time, while our country is
struggling to rise from beneath the iron heel of a tyrant oppressor,
when the very future of the South as a place bearable for our women and
children to live in depends on the labor of our own hands, when the
tools which we have to use, to depend on, are the pride and integrity
and forbearance of black men and the pride and integrity and forbearance
of white; that you, I say, a white man, a white*' and your grandfather
trying to reach him, stop him, trying to push through the crowd, saying,
'Jim. Jim. Jim!â and it already too late, as if Hamblett's own voice had
waked him at last or as if someone had snapped his fingers under his
nose and waked him, he looking at the prisoner now but saying 'white'
again even while his voice died away as if the order to stop the voice
had been shocked into short circuit, and every face in the room turned
toward the prisoner as Hamblett cried, 'What are you? Who and where did
you come from?â "Your grandfather got him out, quashed the indictment
and paid the fine and brought him back to his office and talked to him
while Judith waited in the anteroom. 'You are Charles Bon's son,' he
said. 'I dont know,' the other answered, harsh and sullen. 'You dont
remember?â your grandfather said. The other did not answer. Then your
grandfather told him he must go away, disappear, giving him money to go
on: 'Whatever you are, once you are among strangers, people who dont
know you, you can be whatever you will. I will make it all right; I will
talk toitoi What do you call her?â And he had gone too far now, but it
was too late to stop; he sat there and looked at that still face which
had no more expression than Judith's, nothing of hope nor pain: just
sullen and inscrutable and looking down at the calloused womanish hands
with their cracked nails which held the money while your grandfather
thought how he could not say 'Miss Judith', since that would postulate
the blood more than ever. Then he thought I dont even know whether he
wants to hide it or not. So he said Miss Sutpen. 'I will tell Miss
Sutpen, not where you are going of course, because I wont know that
myself. But just that you are gone and that I knew you were going and
that you will be all right.' "So he departed, and your grandfather rode
out to tell Judith, and Clytie came to the door and looked full and
steadily at his face and said I 65

Page 153

nothing and went to call Judith, and your grandfather waited in that dim
shrouded parlor and knew that he would not have to tell either of them.
He did not have to. Judith came presently and stood and looked at him
and said, âI suppose you wont tell me.*'Not wont, cant,' your
grandfather said. âBut not now because of any promise I made him. But he
has money; he will be*' and stopped, with that forlorn little boy
invisible between them who had come there eight years ago with the
overall jumper over what remained of his silk and broadcloth, who had
become the youth in the uniformithe tattered hat and the overallsiof his
ancient curse, who had become the young man with a young man's potence
yet was still that lonely child in his parchmentiandidenim hairshirt,
and your grandfather speaking the lame vain words, the specious and
empty fallacies which we call comfort, thinking Better that he were
dead, better that he had never lived: then thinking what vain and empty
recapitulation that would be to her if he were to say it, who doubtless
had already said it, thought it, changing only the person and the
number. He returned to town. And now, next time, he was not sent for; he
learned it as the town learned it: by that country grapevine whose
source is among negroes, and he, Charles Etienne Saint7Valery Bon,
already returned (not home again; returned) before your grandfather
learned how he had come back, appeared, with a coal black and apeilike
woman and an authentic wedding license, brought back by the woman since
he had been so severely beaten and mauled recently that he could not
even hold himself on the spavined and saddleless mule on which he rode
while his wife walked beside it to keep him from falling off; rode up to
the house and apparently flung the wedding license in Judith's face with
something of that invincible despair with which he had attacked the
negroes in the dice game. And none ever to know what incredible tale lay
behind that year's absence which he never referred to and which the
woman who, even a year later and after their son was born, still existed
in that aghast and automatonilike state in which she had arrived, did
not, possibly could not, recount but which she seemed to exude gradually
and by a process of terrific and incredulous excretion like the sweat of
fear or anguish: how he had found her, dragged her out of whatever two
dimensional backwater (the very name of which, town or village, she
either had never known or the shock of her exodus from it 1 66

Page 154

had driven the name forever from her mind and memory) her mentality had
been capable of coercing food and shelter from, and married her, held
her very hand doubtless while she made the laborious cross on the
register before she even knew his name or knew that he was not a white
man (and this last none knew even now if she knew for certain, even
after the son was born in one of the dilapidated slave cabins which he
rebuilt after renting his parcel of land from Judith); how there
followed something like a year composed of a succession of periods of
utter immobility like a broken cinema film, which the whiteicolored man
who had married her spent on his back recovering from the last mauling
he had received, in frowsy stinking rooms in placesitowns and cities*
which likewise had no names to her, broken by other periods, intervals,
of furious and incomprehensible and apparently reasonless moving,
progression 7a maelstrom of faces and bodies through which the man
thrust, dragging her behind him, toward or from what, driven by what
fury which would not let him rest, she did not know, each one to end,
finish, as the one before it had so that it was almost a ritualithe man
apparently hunting out situations in order to flaunt and fling the
apeilike body of his charcoal companion in the faces of all and any who
would retaliate: the negro stevedores and deckhands on steamboats or in
city honkyitonks who thought he was a white man and believed it only the
more strongly when he denied it; the white men who, when he said he was
a negro, believed that he lied in order to save his skin, or worse: from
sheer besotment of sexual perversion; in either case the result the
same: the man with body and limbs almost as light and delicate as a
girl's giving the first blow, usually unarmed and heedless of the
numbers opposed to him, with that same fury and implacability and
physical imperviousness to pain and punishment, neither cursing nor
panting, but laughing. "So he showed Judith the license and took his
wife, already far gone with the child, to the ruined cabin which he had
chosen to repair and installed her, kenneled her with a gesture perhaps,
and returned to the house. And nobody to know what transpired that
evening between him and Judith, in whatever carpetless room furnished
with whatever chairs and such which they had not had to chop up and burn
to cook food or for warmth or maybe to heat water for illness from time
to timeithe woman who had been widowed before she had been a bride, the
son of l 67

Page 155

the man who had bereaved her and a hereditary negro concubine, who had
not resented his black blood so much as he had denied the white, and
this with a curious and outrageous exaggeration in which was inherent
its own irrevocability, almost exactly as the demon himself might have
done it. (Because there was love Mr Compson said There was that letter
she brought and gave to your grandmother to keep He (Quentin) could see
it, as plainly as he saw the one open upon the open text book on the
table before him, white in his father's dark hand against his linen leg
in the September twilight where the cigarismell, the wistariaismell, the
fireflies drifted, thinking Yes. I have heard too much, I have been told
too much; I have had to listen to too much, too long thinking Yes,
almost exactly like Father: that letter, and who to know what moral
restoration she might have contemplated in the privacy of that house,
that room, that night, what hurdling o f iron old traditions since she
had seen almost everything else she had learned to call stable vanish
like straws in a gale; *she sitting there beside the lamp in a straight
chair, erect, in the same calico save that the sunbonnet would be
missing now, the head bare now, the once coaliblack hair streaked with
gray now while he faced her, standing. He would not have sat; perhaps
she would not even have asked him to, and the cold level voice would not
be much louder than the sound of the lamp's flame: âI was wrong. I admit
it. I believed that there were things which still mattered just because
they had mattered once. But I was wrong. Nothing matters but breath,
breathing, to know and to be alive. And the child, the license, the
paper. What about it? That paper is between you and one who is
inescapably negro; it can be put aside, no one will anymore dare bring
it up than any other prank o f a young man in his wild youth. And as for
the child, all right. Didn't my own father beget one? and he none the
worse for it? We will even keep the woman and the child i f you wish;
they can stay here and Clytie will. . . 'watching him, staring at him
yet not moving, immobile, erect, her hands folded motionless on her lap,
hardly breathing as i f he were some wild bird or beast which might take
flight at the expansion and contraction of her nostrils or the movement
0 f her breast: âNo: L I will. I will raise it, see that it. . . . It
does not need to have any name; you will neither have to see it again
nor to worry. We will have General Compson sell some 0 f the land, he
will do it, and you can go. Into the North, the cities, where l 68

Page 156

by the negroes who seemed to fear either him or Clytie or Judith, as
being either blind or violently drunk in the negro store district on
Depot Street, where your grandfather would come and take him away (or if
he were too drunk, had become violent, the town officers) and keep him
until his wife, the black gargoyle, could hitch the team back into the
wagon and come, with nothing alive about her but her eyes and hands, and
load him into it and take him home. So they did not even miss him from
town at first; it was the County Medical Officer who told your
grandfather that he had yellow fever and that Judith had had him moved
into the big house and was nursing him and now Judith had the disease
too, and your grandfather told him to notify Miss Coldfield and he (your
grandfather) rode out there one day. He did not dismount; he sat his
horse and called until Clytie looked down at him from one of the upper
windows and told him âthey didn't need nothing'. Within the week your
grandfather learned that Clytie had been right, or was right now anyway,
though it was Judith who died first." "Oh," Quentin said.7Yes he thought
Too much, too long remembering how he had looked at the fifth grave and
thought how whoever had buried Judith must have been afraid that the
other dead would contract the disease from her, since her grave was at
the opposite side of the enclosure, as far from the other four as the
enclosure would permit, thinking Father wont have to say âthink' this
time because he knew who had ordered and bought that headstone before he
read the inscription on it, thinking about, imagining what careful
printed directions Judith must have roused herself (from delirium
possibly) to write down for Clytie when she knew that she was going to
die; and how Clytie must have lived during the next twelve years while
she raised the child which had been born in the old slave cabin and
scrimped and saved the money to finish paying out the stone on which
Judith had paid his grandfather the hundred dollars twentyifour years
ago and which, when his grandfather tried to refuse it, she (Clytie) set
the rusty can full of nickels and dimes and frayed paper money on the
desk and walked out of the office without a word. He had to brush the
clinging cedar needles from this one also to read it, watching these
letters also emerge beneath his hand, wondering quietly how they could
have clung there, not have been blistered to ashes at the instant of
contact with the harsh and izo

Page 157

brotheriinilaw *the same citizens and neighbors who left baskets of food
on her doorstep at night, the dishes (the plates containing the food,
the napkins which covered it) from which she never washed but returned
soiled to the empty basket and set the basket back on the same step
where she had found it as if to carry completely out the illusion that
it had never existed or at least that she had never touched, emptied,

it, had not come out and taken the basket up with that air which had
nothing whatever o f furtiveness in it nor even defiance, who doubtless
tasted the food, criticised its quality or cooking, chewed and swallowed
it and felt it digest yet still clung to that delusion, that calm
incorrigible insistence that that which all incontrovertible evidence
tells her is so does not exist, as women can; *that same self deluding
which declined to admit that the liquidation o f the store had left her
something, that she had been left anything but a complete pauper, who
would not accept the actual money from the sale 0 f the store from Judge
Benbow yet would accept the money's value (and after a few years,
overivalue) in a dozen ways: would use casual negro boys l7l ..ERR,
CODzlâ

Page 158

who happened to pass the house, stopping them and commanding them to
rake her yard and they doubtless as aware as the town was that there
would be no mention of pay from her, that they would not even see her
again though they knew she was watching them from behind the curtains of
a window, but that judge Benbow would pay themiwould enter the stores
and command objects from the shelves and showcases exactly as she
commanded that two hundred dollar headstone from Judge Benbow, and walk
out of the store with themiwho with the same aberrant cunning which
would not wash the dishes and napkins from the baskets declined to have
any discussion 0 f her affairs with Benbow since she must have known
that the sums which she had received from him must have years ago
overibalanced (he, Benbow, had in his office a portfolio, a fat one,
with Estate of Goodhue Coldfield. Private written across it in indelible
ink. After the judge died his son Percy opened it. It was filled with
racing forms and cancelled betting tickets on horses whose very bones
were no man knew where now, which had won and lost races on the Memphis
track forty years ago, and a ledger, a careful tabulation in the judge's
hand, each entry indicating the date and the horse's name and his wager
and whether he won or lost; and another one showing how for forty years
he had put each winning and an amount equal to each loss, to that
mythical account) whatever the store had brought But you were not
listening, because you knew it all already, had learned, absorbed it
already without the medium 0 f speech somehow from having been born and
living beside it, with it, as children will and do: so that what your
father was saying did not tell you anything so much as it struck, word
by word, the resonant strings o f remembering, who had been here before,
seen these graves more than once in the rambling expeditions o f boyhood
whose aim was more than the mere hunting 0 f game, just as you had seen
the old house too, been familiar with how it would look before you even
saw it, became large enough to go out there one day with four or five
other boys of your size and age and dare one another to evoke the ghost,
since it would have to be haunted, could not but be haunted although it
had stood there empty and unthreatening for twentyisix years and nobody
to meet or report any ghost until the wagon full 0 f strangers moving
from Arkansas tried to stop and spend the night in it and something
happened before they could begin to unload the 172

Page 159

wagon even, what they did not or could not or would not tell but which
had them back in the wagon and the mules going back down the drive at a
gallop, all in about ten minutes, not to stop until they reached
Jeffersonithe rotting shell with its sagging portico and scaling walls,
its sagging blinds and blankishuttered windows, set in the middle of the
domain which had reverted to the state and had been bought and sold and
bought and sold again and again and again. No, you were not listening;
you didn't have to: then the dogs stirred, rose; you looked up and sure
enough, just as your father had said he would, Luster had halted the
mule and the two horses in the rain about fifty yards from the cedars,
sitting there with his knees drawn up under the towsack and enclosed by
the cloudy vapor of the steaming animals as though he were looking at
you and your father out o f some lugubrious and painless purgatory.

âCome on in out of the rain, Luster,â your father said. I wont let the
old Colonel hurt you.'7'Yawl come on and less go home,' Luster said.
âAint no more hunting today. i'We'll get wet,' your father said. âl'll

tell you what: we'll ride on over to that old house. We can keep good
and dry there.' But Luster didn't budge, sitting there in the rain and
inventing reasons not to go to the houseithat the roof would leak or
that you would all three catch cold with no fire or that you would all
get so wet before you reached it that the best thing to do would be to
go straight home: and your father laughing at Luster but you not
laughing so much because even though you were not black like Luster was,
you were not any older, and you and Luster had both been there that day
when the five 0 f you, the five boys all of an age, began daring one
another to enter the house long before you reached it, coming up from
the rear, into the old street of the slave quartersiia jungle of sumach
and persimmon and briers and honeysuckle , and the rotting piles of what
had once been log walls and stone chimneys and shingle roofs among the
undergrowth except one, that one; you coming up to it; you didn't see
the old woman at all at first because you were watching the boy, the Jim
Bond, the hulking slackimouthed saddleicolored boy a few years older and
bigger than you were, in patched and faded yet quite clean shirt and
overalls too small for him, working in the garden patch beside the
cabin: so you didn't even know she was there until all of you started
and whirled as one and found her watching you from a chair tilted back
against the cabin wallia little driediup 173

Page 160

woman not much bigger than a monkey and who might have been any age up
to ten thousand years, in faded voluminous skirts and an immaculate
headrag, her bare coffeeicolored feet wrapped around the chair rung like
monkeys do, smoking a clay pipe and watching you with eyes like two shoe
buttons buried in the myriad wrinkles o f her coffeeicolored face, who
just looked at you and said without even removing the pipe and in a
voice almost like a white woman's: âWhat do you want?'and after a moment
one o f you said âNothing' and then you were all running without knowing
which of you began to run first nor why since you were not scared, back
across the fallow and rainigutted and brierichoked old fields until you
came to the old rotting snake fence and crossed it, hurled yourselves
over it, and then the earth, the land, the sky and trees and woods,
looked different again, all right again "Yes," Quentin said. "And that
was the one Luster was talking about now," Shreve said. "And your father
watching you again because you hadn't heard the name before, hadn't even
thought that he must have a name that day when you saw him in the
vegetable patch, and you said, âWho? Jim what?â and Luster said, âDas
him. Brighticolored boy whut stay wid dat ole woman' and your father
still watching you and you said, âSpell it' and Luster said, âDat's a
lawyer word. Whut dey puts you under when de Law ketches you. I des
spells readin words.' And that was him, the name Bond now and he
wouldn't care about that, who had inherited what he was from his mother
and only what he could never have been from his father, and if your
father had asked him if he was Charles Bon's son he not only would not
have known either, he wouldn't have cared: and if you had told him he
was, it would have touched and then vanished from what you (not he)
would have had to call his mind long before it could have set up any
reaction at all, either of pride or pleasure, anger or grief?" "Yes,"
Quentin said. "And that he lived in that cabin behind the haunted house
for twentyisix years, he and the old woman who must be more than seventy
now yet who had no white hair under that headrag, whose flesh had not
sagged but looked instead like she had grown old up to a certain point
just like normal people do, then had stopped, and instead of turning
gray and soft she had begun to shrink so that the skin of her face and
hands 174

Page 161

broke into a million tiny crossihair wrinkles and her body just grew
smaller and smaller like something being shrunk in a furnace, like the
Bornese do their captured headsiwho might well have been the ghost if
one was ever needed, if anybody ever had so little else to do as to
prowl around the house, which there was not; if there could have been
anything in it to protect from prowlers, which there was not; if there
had been anyone of them left to hide or need concealment in it, which
there was not. And yet this old gal, this Aunt Rosa, told you that
someone was hiding out there and you said it was Clytie or Jim Bond and
she said No and you said it would have to be because the demon was dead
and Judith was dead and Bon was dead and Henry gone so far he hadn't
even left a grave: and she said No and so you went on: and there was?"
"Yes." "Wait then," Shreve said. "For God's sake wait.")

Page 162

T bere was no snow on Shreve's arm now, no sleeve on his arm at all now:
only the smooth cupidifleshed forearm and hand coming back into the lamp
and taking a pipe from the empty coffee can where he kept them, filling
it and lighting it. So it is zero outside, Quentin thought; soon he will
raise the window and do deepibreathing in it, clenchifisted and naked to
the waist, in the warm and rosy orifice above the iron quad. But he had
not done so yet, and now the moment, the thought, was an hour past and
the pipe lay smoked out and overturned and cold, with a light sprinkling
of ashes about it, on the table before Shreve's crossed pink
brightihaired arms while he watched Quentin from behind the two opaque
and lampiglared moons of his spectacles. "So he just wanted a grandson,"
he said. "That was all he was after. Jesus, the South is fine, isn't it.
It's better than the theatre, isn't it. It's better than Ben Hur, isn't
it. No wonder you have to come away now and then, isn't it." Quentin did
not answer. He sat quite still, facing the table, his hands lying on
either side of the open text book on which the letter rested: the
rectangle of paper folded across the middle and now open, three quarters
open, whose bulk had raised half itself by the leverage of the old
crease in weightless and paradoxical levitation, lying at such an angle
that he could not possibly have read it, deciphered it, even without
this added distortion. Yet he seemed to be looking at it, or as near as
Shreve could 176

Page 163

tell, he was, his face lowered a little, brooding, almost sullen. "He
told Grandfather about it," he said. "That time when the architect
escaped, tried to, tried to escape into the river bottom and go back to
New Orleans or wherever it was, and he*" ("The demon, hey?" Shreve said.
Quentin did not answer him, did not pause, his voice level, curious, a
little dreamy yet still with that overtone of sullen bemusement, of
smoldering outrage: so that Shreve, still too, resembling in his
spectacles and nothing else (from the waist down the table concealed
him; anyone entering the room would have taken him to be stark naked) a
baroque effigy created out of colored cake dough by someone with a
faintly nightmarish affinity for the perverse, watched him with
thoughtful and intent curiosity.) "*sent word in to Grandfather and some
others and got his dogs and his wild niggers out and hunted the
architect down and made him take earth in a cave under the river bank
two days later. That was in the second summer, when they had finished
all the brick and had the foundations laid and most of the big timbers
cut and trimmed, and one day the architect couldn't stand it anymore or
he was afraid he would starve or that the wild niggers (and maybe
Colonel Sutpen too) would run out of grub and eat him or maybe he got

homesick or maybe he just had to goi" ("Maybe he had a girl," Shreve
said. "Or maybe he just wanted a girl. You said the demon and the
niggers didn't have but two." Quentin did not answer this either; again

he might not have heard, talking in that curious repressed calm voice as
though to the table before him or the book upon it or the letter upon
the book or his hands lying on either side of the book.) "*and so he
went. He seemed to vanish in broad daylight, right out from the middle
of twentyione people. Or maybe it was just Sutpen's back that was
turned, and that the niggers saw him go and didn't think it needed
mentioning; that being wild men they probably didn't know what Sutpen
himself was up to and him naked in the mud with them all day. So I
reckon they never did know what the architect was there for, supposed to
do or had done or could do or was, so maybe they thought Sutpen had sent
him, told him to go away and drown himself, go away and die, or maybe
just go away. So he did, jumped up in broad daylight, in his embroidered
vest and Fauntleroy tie and a hat like a Baptist congressman and
probably carrying the hat in his hand, and ran into the swamp and the
niggers 177

Page 164

watched him out of sight and then went back to work and Sutpen didn't
see it, didn't even miss him until night, suppertime probably, and the
niggers told him and he declared a holiday tomorrow because he would
have to get out and borrow some dogs. Not that he would have needed
dogs, with his niggers to trail, but maybe he thought that the guests,
the others, would not be used to trailing with niggers and would expect
dogs. And Grandfather (he was young then too) brought some champagne and
some of the others brought whiskey and they began to gather out there a
little after sundown, at his house that didn't even have walls yet, that
wasn't anything yet but some lines of bricks sunk into the ground but
that was all right because they didn't go to bed anyhow, Grandfather
said, they just sat around the fire with the champagne and the whiskey
and a quarter of the last venison he had killed, and about midnight the
man with the dogs came. Then it was daylight and the dogs had a little
trouble at first because some of the wild niggers had run out about a
mile of the trail just for fun. But they got the trail straightened out
at last, the dogs and the niggers in the bottom and most of the men
riding along the edge of it where the going was good. But Grandfather
and Colonel Sutpen went with the dogs and the niggers because Sutpen was
afraid the niggers might catch the architect before he could reach them.
He and Grandfather had to walk a good deal, sending one of the niggers
to lead the horses on around the bad places until they could ride again.
Grandfather said it was fine weather and the trail lay pretty good but
he said it would have been fine if the architect had just waited until
October or November. And so he told Grandfather something about it. "His
trouble was innocence. All of a sudden he discovered, not what he wanted
to do but what he just had to do, had to do it whether he wanted to or
not, because if he did not do it he knew that he could never live with
himself for the rest of his life, never live with what all the men and
women that had died to make him had left inside of him for him to pass
on, with all the dead ones waiting and watching to see if he was going
to do it right, fix things right so that he would be able to look in the
face not only the old dead ones but all the living ones that would come
after him when he would be one of the dead. And that at the very moment
when he discovered what it was, he found out that this was the last
thing in the world he was equipped to do because he not only had 178

Page 165

"All right all right all right," Quentin said.) "*where what few other
people he knew lived in log cabins boiling with children like the one he
was born inimen and grown boys who hunted or lay before the fire on the
floor while the women and older girls stepped back and forth across them
to reach the fire to cook, where the only colored people were Indians
and you only looked down at them over your rifle sights, where he had
never even heard of, never imagined, a place, a land divided neatly up
and actually owned by men who did nothing but ride over it on fine
horses or sit in fine clothes on the galleries of big houses while other
people worked for them; he did not even imagine then that there was any
such way to live or to want to live, or that there existed all the
objects to be wanted which there were, or that the ones who owned the
objects not only could look down on the ones that didn't, but could be
supported in the down7 looking not only by the others who owned objects
too but by the very ones that were looked down on that didn't own
objects and knew they never would. Because where he lived the land
belonged to anybody and everybody and so the man who would go to the
trouble and work to fence off a piece of it and say 'This is mine' was
crazy; and as for objects, nobody had any more of them than you did
because everybody had just what he was strong enough or energetic enough
to take and keep, and only that crazy man would go to the trouble to
take or even want more than he could eat or swap for powder and whiskey.
So he didn't even know there was a country all divided and fixed and
neat with a people living on it all divided and fixed and neat because
of what color their skins happened to be and what they happened to own,
and where a certain few men not only had the power of life and death and
barter and sale over others, they had living human men to perform the
endless 179

Page 166

repetitive personal offices such as pouring the very whiskey from the
jug and putting the glass into his hand or pulling off his boots for him
to go to bed that all men have had to do for themselves since time began
and would have to do until they died and which no man ever has or ever
will like to do but which no man that he knew had ever anymore thought
of evading than he had thought of evading the effort of chewing and
swallowing and breathing. When he was a child he didn't listen to the
vague and cloudy tales of Tidewater splendor that penetrated even his
mountains because then he could not understand what the people meant,
and when he became a boy he didn't listen to them because there was
nothing in sight to compare and gauge the tales by and so give the words
life and meaning, and no chance that he ever would (certainly no belief
or thought that someday he might), and because he was too busy doing the
things that boys do; and when he got to be a youth and curiosity itself
exhumed the tales which he did not know he had heard and speculated
about them, he was interested and would have liked to see the places
once, but without envy or regret, because he just thought that some
people were spawned in one place and some in another, some spawned rich
(lucky, he may have called it: or maybe he called lucky, rich) and some
not, and that (so he told Grandfather) the men themselves had little to
do with the choosing and less of the regret because (he told Grandfather
this too) it had never once occurred to him that any man should take any
such blind accident as that as authority or warrant to look down at
others, any others. So he had hardly heard of such a world until he fell
into it. "That's how it was. They fell into it, the whole family,
returned to the coast from which the first Sutpen had come (when the
ship from the Old Bailey reached Jamestown probably), tumbled head over
heels back to Tidewater by sheer altitude, elevation and gravity, as if
whatever slight hold the family had had (he said something to
Grandfather about his mother dying about that time and how his pap said
she was a fine wearying woman and that he would miss her; and something
about how it was the wife that had got his father even that far West) on
the mountain had broken and now the whole passel of them from the father
through the grown daughters down to one that couldn't even walk yet,
sliding back down out of the mountains and skating in a kind of ac* 180

Page 167

celerating and sloven and inert coherence like a useless collection of
flotsam on a flooded river moving by some perverse automotivation such
as inanimate objects sometimes show, backward against the very current
of the stream, across the Virginia plateau and into the slack lowlands
about the mouth of the James River. He didn't know why they moved, or
didn't remember the reason if he ever knew itiwhether it was optimism,
hope in his father's breast or nostalgia, since he didn't know just
where his father had come from, whether the country to which they
returned was it or not, or even if his father knew, remembered, wanted
to remember and find it again; whether somebody, some traveler, had told
him of some easy place or time, some escape from the hardship of getting
food and keeping warm in the mountain way, or if perhaps somebody his
father knew once or who knew his father once and remembered him,
happened to think about him, or someone kin to him who had tried to
forget him and couldn't quite do it, bad sent for him and be obeying,
going not for the promised job but for the ease, having faith perhaps in
the blood kinship to evade the labor if it was kinship, in his own
inertia and in whatever gods had watched over him this far if it were
not. But he*" ("The demon," Shreve said) "*didn't know, or remember,
whether he had ever heard, been told, the reason or not. All he
remembered was that one morning the father rose and told the older girls
to pack what food they had, and somebody wrapped up the baby and
somebody else threw water on the fire and they walked down the mountain
to where roads existed. They had a lopsided twoiwheeled cart and two
spavined oxen now. He told Grandfather he did not remember just where
nor when nor how his father bad got it, and be (he was ten then; the two
older boys had left home some time before and had not been heard of
since) driving the oxen since almost as soon as they got the cart his
father began the practice of accomplishing that part of the translation
devoted to motion flat on his back in the cart, oblivious among the
quilts and lanterns and well buckets and bundles of clothing and
children, snoring with alcohol. That was how he told it. He didn't
remember if it was weeks or months or a year they traveled (except that
one of the older girls who had left the cabin unmarried was still
unmarried when they finally stopped, though she had become a mother
before they lost the last blue mountain range), whether it was that
winter and l 81

Page 168

then spring and then summer overtook and passed them on the road or
whether they overtook and passed in slow succession the seasons as they
descended or whether it was the descent itself that did it and they not
progressing parallel in time but descending perpendicularly through
temperature and climateia (you couldn't call it a period because as he
remembered it or as he told Grandfather he did, it didn't have either a
definite beginning or a definite ending. Maybe attenuation is better)
fan attenuation from a kind of furious inertness and patient immobility
while they sat in the cart outside the doors of doggeries and taverns
and waited for the father to drink himself insensible, to a sort of
dreamy and destinationless locomotion after they had got the old man out
of whatever shed or outhouse or barn or ditch and loaded him into the
cart again and during which they did not seem to progress at all but
just to hang suspended while the earth itself altered, flattened and
broadened out of the mountain cove where they had all been born,
mounting, rising about them like a tide in which the strange harsh rough
faces about the doggery doors into which the old man was just entering
or was just being carried or thrown out (and this one time by a huge
bull of a nigger, the first black man, slave, they had ever seen, who
emerged with the old man over his shoulder like a sack of meal and
hisithe nigger'simouth loud with laughing and full of teeth like
tombstones) swam up and vanished and were replaced; the earth, the
world, rising about them and flowing past as if the cart moved on a
treadmill (and it now spring and now summer and they still moving on
toward a place they had never seen and had no conception of, let alone
wanted to go to; and from a place, a little lost spot on the side of a
hill back to which probably not one of them iexcepting possibly the
usually insensible father who made one stage of the journey accompanied
by the raspberryicolored elephants and snakes which he seems to have
been hunting foricould have led the way) bringing into and then removing
from their sober static country astonishment the strange faces and
places, both faces and places* doggeries and taverns now become hamlets,
hamlets now become villages , villages now towns and the country
flattened out now with good roads and fields and niggers working in the
fields while white men sat fine horses and watched them, and more fine
horses and men in fine clothes, with a different look in the face from
mountain men about the l 82

Page 169

taverns where the old man was not even allowed to come in by the front
door and from which his mountain drinking manners got him ejected before
he would have time to get drunk good (so that now they began to make
really pretty good time) and no laughter and jeers to the ejecting now,
even if the laughter and jeers had been harsh and without much
gentleness in them. "That's the way he got it. He had learned the
difference not only between white men and black ones, but he was
learning that there was a difference between white men and white men not
to be measured by lifting anvils or gouging eyes or how much whiskey you
could drink then get up and walk out of the room. That is, he had begun
to discern that without being aware of it yet. He still thought that
that was just a matter of where you were spawned and how; lucky or not
lucky; and that the lucky ones would be even slower and lother than the
unlucky to take any advantage of it or credit for it, feel that it gave
them anything more than the luck; that they would feel if anything more
tender toward the unlucky than the unlucky would ever need to feel
toward them. He was to find all that out later. He remembered when he
did it, because that was the same second when he discovered the
innocence. It was not the second, the moment, that he was long about: it
was the getting to it: the moment when they must have realised, believed
at last that they were no longer traveling, moving, going somewhereinot
the being still at last and in a fashion settled, because they had done
that before on the road; he remembered how one time the gradual
difference in comfort between the presence and absence of shoes and warm
clothing occurred in one place: a cowshed where the sister's baby was
born and, as he told Grandfather, for all he could remember, locate in
elapsed time, conceived too. Because they were stopped now at last. He
didn't know where they were. For a time, during the first days or weeks
or months, the woodsman's instinct which he had acquired from the
environment where he grew up or maybe had been bequeathed him by the two
brothers who had vanished, one of which had been as far West as the
Mississippi River one timeibequeathed him along with the wornout
buckskin garments and such which they left in the cabin when they
departed the last time for goodiand which he had sharpened by boy's
practice at small game and such, kept him oriented so that he could have
1 83

Page 170

(so he said) found his way back to the mountain cabin in time. But that
was past now, the moment when he last could have said exactly where he
had been born now weeks and months (maybe a year, the year, since that
was when he became confused about his age and was never able to
straighten it out again, so that he told Grandfather that he did not
know within a year on either side just how old he was) behind him. So he
knew neither where he had come from nor where he was nor why. He was
just there, surrounded by the faces, almost all the faces which he had
ever known, always known (though the number of them, despite the efforts
of the unmarried sister who pretty soon, so he told Grandfather, and
still without any wedding had another baby, decreasing, thinning out,
because of the climate, the warmth, the dampness) living in a cabin that
was almost a replica of the mountain one except that it didn't sit up in
the bright wind but sat instead beside a big flat river that sometimes
showed no current at all and even sometimes ran backward, where his
sisters and brothers seemed to take sick after supper and die before the
next meal, where regiments of niggers with white men watching them
planted and raised things that he had never heard of (the old man did
something too, something besides drink now. At least, he would leave the
cabin after breakfast and return sober to supper, and he fed them
somehow) and the man who owned all the land and the niggers and
apparently the white men who superintended the work, lived in the
biggest house he had ever seen and spent most of the afternoon (he told
how he would creep up among the tangled shrubbery of the lawn and lie
hidden and watch the man) in a barrel stave hammock between two trees,
with his shoes off and a nigger who wore every day better clothes than
he or his father and sisters had ever owned and ever expected to, who
did nothing else but fan him and bring him drinks; and he (he was eleven
or twelve or thirteen now because this was where he realised that he had
irrevocably lost count of his age) lying there all afternoon while the
sisters would come from time to time to the door of the cabin two miles
away and scream at him for wood or water, watching that man who not only
had shoes in the summertime too, but didn't even have to wear them. "But
he still didn't envy the man he was watching. He coveted the shoes, and
probably he would have liked for his father to have a broad7 184

Page 171

cloth monkey to hand him the jug and to carry the wood and water into
the cabin for his sisters to wash and cook with and keep the house warm
so that he himself would not have to do it. Maybe he even realised,
understood the pleasure it would have given his sisters for their
neighbors (other whites like them, who lived in other cabins not quite
as well built and not at all as well kept and preserved as the ones the
nigger slaves lived in but still nimbused with freedom's bright aura,
which the slave quarters were not for all their sound roofs and white
wash) to see them being waited on. Because he had not only not lost the
innocence yet, he had not yet discovered that he possessed it. He no
more envied the man than he would have envied a mountain man who
happened to own a fine rifle. He would have coveted the rifle, but he
would himself have supported and confirmed the owner's pride and
pleasure in its ownership because he could not have conceived of the
owner taking such crass advantage of the luck which gave the rifle to
him rather than to another as to say to other men: Because 1 own this
rifle, my arms and legs and blood and bones are superior to yours except
as the victorious outcome of a fight with rifles: and how in the world
could a man fight another man with dressediup niggers and the fact that
he could lie in a hammock all afternoon with his shoes off? and what in
the world would he be fighting for if he did? He didn't even know he was
innocent that day when his father sent him to the big house with the
message. He didn't remember (or did not say) what the message was,
apparently he still didn't know exactly just what his father did, what
work (or maybe supposed to do) the old man had in relation to the
plantationia boy either thirteen or fourteen, he didn't know which, in
garments his father had got from the plantation commissary and had worn
out and which one of the sisters had patched and cut down to fit him and
he no more conscious of his appearance in them or of the possibility
that anyone else would be than he was of his skin, following the road
and turning into the gate and following the drive up past where still
more niggers with nothing to do all day but plant flowers and trim grass
were working, and so to the house, the portico, the front door, thinking
how at last he was going to see the inside of it, see what else a man
was bound to own who could have a special nigger to hand him his liquor
and pull off his shoes that he didn't even need to wear, never for one
moment thinking but 1 85

Page 172

what the man would be as pleased to show him the balance of his things
as the mountain man would have been to show the powder horn and bullet
mold that went with the rifle. Because he was still innocent. He knew it
without being aware that he did; he told Grandfather how, before the
monkey nigger who came to the door had finished saying what he did, he
seemed to kind of dissolve and a part of him turn and rush back through
the two years they had lived there like when you pass through a room
fast and look at all the objects in it and you turn and go back through
the room again and look at all the objects from the other side and you
find out you had never seen them before, rushing back through those two
years and seeing a dozen things that had happened and he hadn't even
seen them before: a certain flat level silent way his older sisters and
the other white women of their kind had of looking at niggers, not with
fear or dread but with a kind of speculative antagonism not because of
any known fact or reason but inherited by both white and black, the
sense, effluvium of it passing between the white women in the doors of
the sagging cabins and the niggers in the road and which was not quite
explainable by the fact that the niggers had better clothes, and which
the niggers did not return as antagonism or in any sense of dare or
taunt but through the very fact that they were apparently oblivious of
it, too oblivious of it (you knew that you could hit them, he told
Grandfather, and they would not hit back or even resist. But you did not
want to, because they (the niggers) were not it, not what you wanted to
hit; that when you hit them you would just be hitting a child's toy
balloon with a face painted on it, a face slick and smooth and distended
and about to burst into laughing and so you did not dare strike it
because it would merely burst and you would rather let it walk on out of
your sight than to have stood there in the loud laughing)*of talk at
night before the fire when they had company or had themselves gone
visiting after supper to another cabin, the voices of the women sober
enough, even calm, yet filled with a quality dark and sullen and only
some man, usually his father in drink, to break out into harsh
recapitulation of his own worth, the respect which his own physical
prowess commanded from his fellows, and the boy of either thirteen or
fourteen or maybe twelve knowing that the men and the women were talking
about the same thing though it had never once been mentioned by name,
like 1 86

Page 173

when people talk about privation without mentioning the siege, about
sickness without ever naming the epidemic;*of one afternoon when he and
his sister were walking along the road and he heard the carriage coming
up behind them and stepped off the road and then realised that his
sister was not going to give way to it, that she still walked in the
middle of the road with a sort of sullen implacability in the very angle
of her head and he shouted at her: and then it was all dust and rearing
horses and glinting harness buckles and wheel spokes; he saw two
parasols in the carriage and the nigger coachman in a plug hat shouting:
'Hoo dar, gal! Git outen de way dar!â and then it was over, gone: the
carriage and the dust, the two faces beneath the parasols glaring down
at his sister: then he was throwing vain clods of dirt after the dust as
it spun on, knowing now, while the monkeyidressed nigger butler kept the
door barred with his body while he spoke, that it had not been the
nigger coachman that he threw at at all, that it was the actual dust
raised by the proud delicate wheels, and just that vain;*of one night
late when his father came home, blundered into the cabin; he could smell
the whiskey even while still dulled with broken sleep, hearing that same
fierce exultation, vindication, in his father's voice: 'We whupped one
of Pettibone's niggers tonight' and he roused at that, waked at that,
asking which one of Pettibone's niggers and his father said he did not
know, had never seen the nigger before: and he asked what the nigger had
done and his father said, 'Hell fire, that goddamn son of a bitch
Pettibone's nigger.'*how, without knowing it then since he had not yet
discovered innocence, he must have meant the question the same way his
father meant the answer: no actual nigger, living creature, living flesh
to feel pain and writhe and cry out. He could even seem to see them: the
torchidisturbed darkness among trees, the fierce hysterical faces of the
white men, the balloon face of the nigger. Maybe the nigger's hands
would be tied or held but that would be all right because they were not
the hands with which the balloon face would struggle and writhe for
freedom, not the balloon face: it was just poised among them, levitative
and slick with paperithin distension. Then someone would strike the
balloon one single desperate and despairing blow and then he would seem
to see them fleeing, running, with all about them, overtaking them and
passing and going on and then returning to overwhelm them again, 187

Page 174

the roaring waves of mellow laughter meaningless and terrifying and
loud. And now he stood there before that white door with the monkey
nigger barring it and looking down at him in his patched madeiover jeans
clothes and no shoes and I dont reckon he had even ever experimented
with a comb because that would be one of the things that his sisters
would keep hidden goodiwho had never thought about his own hair or
clothes or anybody else's hair or clothes until he saw that monkey
nigger, who through no doing of his own happened to have had the
felicity of being housebred in Richmond maybe, lookingi" ("Or maybe even
in Charleston," Shreve breathed.) "fat them and he never even remembered
what the nigger said, how it was the nigger told him, even before he had
had time to say what he came for, never to come to that front door again
but to go around to the back. "He didn't even remember leaving. All of a
sudden he found himself running and already some distance from the
house, and not toward home. He was not crying, he said. He wasn't even
mad. He just had to think, so he was going to where he could be quiet
and think, and he knew where that place was. He went into the woods. He
says he did not tell himself where to go: that his body, his feet, just
went thereia place where a game trail entered a cane brake and an oak
tree had fallen across it and made a kind of cave where he kept an iron
griddle that he would cook small game on sometimes. He said he crawled
back into the cave and sat with his back against the uptorn roots, and
thought. Because he couldn't get it straight yet. He couldn't even
realise yet that his trouble, his impediment, was innocence because he
would not be able to realise that until he got it straight. So he was
seeking among what little he had to call experience for something to
measure it by, and he couldn't find anything. He had been told to go
around to the back door even before he could state his errand, who had
sprung from a people whose houses didn't have back doors but only
windows and anyone entering or leaving by a window would be either
hiding or escaping, neither of which he was doing. In fact, he had
actually come on business, in the good faith of business which he had
believed that all men accepted. Of course he had not expected to be
invited in to eat a meal since time, the distance from one cooking pot
to the next, did not need to be measured in hours or days; perhaps he
had not expected to be asked into the house at all. 1 88

Page 175

which the balloon held barricaded and protected from such as he, looked
out from whatever invisible place he (the man) happened to be at the
moment, at the boy outside the barred door in his patched garments and
splayed bare feet, looking through and beyond the boy, he himself seeing
his own father and sisters and brothers as the owner, the rich man (not
the nigger) must have been seeing them all the timeias cattle, creatures
heavy and without grace, brutely evacuated into a world without hope or
purpose for them, who would in turn spawn with brutish and vicious
prolixity, populate, double treble and compound, fill space and earth
with a race whose future would be a still too, with in their faces that
infantile enormity which we did not then quite comprehend. Oh yes, there
were plenty to aid and abet him; even he could not have held a horse
race without someone to race against. Because it was not even public
opinion that stopped him, not even the men who might have had wives and
children in carriages to be ridden down and into ditches: it was the 16

Page 176

and still nothing said about it and he still not knowing if he was going
to lie or not. Because he said how the terrible part of it had not
occurred to him yet, he just lay there while the two of them argued
inside of him, speaking in orderly turn, both calm, even leaning
backward to be calm and reasonable and unrancorous: But 1 can kill
him.*No. That wouldn't do no goodiThen what shall we do about it?*l dont
know: and he just listening, not especially interested he said, hearing
the two of them without listening. Because what he was thinking about
now he hadn't asked for. It was just there, natural in a boy, a child,
and he not paying any attention to it either because it was what a boy
would have thought, and he knew that to do what he had to do in order to
live with himself he would have to think it out straight as a man would,
thinking The nigger never give me a chance to tell him what it was and
so he (not the nigger now either) wont know it and whatever it is wont
get done and l9i

Page 177

to him. It was like that, he said, like an explosionia bright glare that
vanished and left nothing, no ashes nor refuse: just a limitless flat
plain with the severe shape of his intact innocence rising from it like
a monument; that innocence instructing him as calm as the others had
ever spoken, using his own rifle analogy to do it with, and when it said
them in place of he or him, it meant more than all the human puny
mortals under the sun that might lie in hammocks all afternoon with
their shoes off: âIf you were fixing to combat them that had the fine
rifles, the first thing you would do would be to get yourself the
nearest thing to a fine rifle you could borrow or steal or make,
wouldn't it?â and he said Yes. 'But this aint a question of rifles. So
to combat them you have got to have what they have that made them do
what he did. You got to have land and niggers and a fine house to combat
them with. You see?â and he said Yes again. He left that night. He waked
before day and departed just like he went to bed: by rising from the
pallet and tiptoeing out of the house. He never saw any of his family
again. "He went to the West Indies." Quentin had not moved, not even to
raise his head from its attitude of brooding bemusement upon the open
letter which lay on the open textbook, his hands lying on the table
before him on either side of the book and the letter, one half of which
slanted lqz

Page 178

upward from the transverse crease without support, as if it had learned
half the secret of levitation. "That was how he said it. He and
Grandfather were sitting on a log now because the dogs had faulted. That
is, they had treedia tree from which he (the architect) could not have
escaped yet which he had undoubtedly mounted because they found the
sapling pole with his suspenders still knotted about one end of it that
he had used to climb the tree though at first they could not understand
why the suspenders and it was three hours before they comprehended that
the architect had used architecture, physics, to elude them as a man
always falls back upon what he knows best in a crisisithe murderer upon
murder, the thief thieving, the liar lying. He (the architect) knew
about the wild negroes even if he couldn't have known that Sutpen would
get dogs; he had chosen that tree and hauled that pole up after him and
calculated stress and distance and trajectory and had crossed a gap to
the next nearest tree that a flying squirrel could not have crossed and
traveled from there on from tree to tree for almost half a mile before
he put foot on the ground again. It was three hours before one of the
wild niggers (the dogs wouldn't leave the tree; they said he was in it)
found where he had come down. So he and Grandfather sat on the log and
talked, and one of the wild niggers went back to camp for grub and the
rest of the whiskey and they blew the other men in with horns and they
ate, and he told Grandfather some more of it while they waited. "He went
to the West Indies. That's how he said it: not how he managed to find
where the West Indies were nor where ships departed from to go there,
nor how he got to where the ships were and got in one nor how he liked
the sea nor about the hardships of a sailor's life and it must have been
hardship indeed for him, a boy of fourteen or fifteen who had never seen
the ocean before, going to sea in 1823. He just said, 'So I went to the
West Indies,â sitting there on the log with Grandfather while the dogs
still bayed the tree where they believed the architect was because he
would have to be thereâsaying it just like that day thirty years later
when he sat in Grandfather's office (in his fine clothes now, even
though they were a little soiled and worn with three years of war, with
money to rattle in his pocket and his beard at its prime too: beard body
and intellect at that peak which all the different parts that make a man
reach, where he can say I did all that I set out to do 193

Page 179

and I could stop here if I wanted to and no man to chide me with sloth,
not even myselfiand maybe this the instant which Fate always picks out
to blackjack you, only the peak feels so sound and stable that the
beginning of the falling is hidden for a little whileiwith his head
flung up a little in that attitude that nobody ever knew exactly who he
had aped it from or if he did not perhaps learn it too from the same
book out of which he taught himself the words, the bombastic phrases
with which Grandfather said he even asked you for a match for his cigar
or offered you the cigariand nothing of vanity, nothing comic in it
either Grandfather said, because of that innocence which he had never
lost because after it finally told him what to do that night he forgot
about it and didn't know that he still had it) and told Grandfatheritold
him, mind; not excusing, asking for no pity; not explaining, asking for
no exculpation: just told Grandfather how he had put his first wife
aside like eleventh and twelfth century kings did: 'I found that she was
not and could never be, through no fault of her own, adjunctive or
incremental to the design which I had in mind, so I provided for her and
put her aside.'*telling Grandfather in that same tone while they sat on
the log waiting for the niggers to come back with the other guests and
the whiskey: 'So I went to the West Indies. I had had some schooling
during a part of one winter, enough to have learned something about
them, to realise that they would be most suitable to the expediency of
my requirements .' He didn't remember how he came to go to the school.
That is, why his father decided all of a sudden to send him, what
nebulous vision or shape might have evolved out of the fog of alcohol
and niggeribeating and scheming to avoid work which his old man called
his mindithe image not of ambition nor glory, not to see his son better
himself for his own sake, probably not even some blind instant of revolt
against that same house whose roof had leaked on probably a hundred
families like his which had come and lived beneath it and vanished and
left no trace, nothing, not even rags and broken crockery, but was
probably mere vindictive envy toward one or two men, planters, whom he
had to see every now and then. Anyway, he was sent to school for about
three months one winterian adolescent boy of thirteen or fourteen in a
room full of children three or four years younger than he and three or
four years further advanced, and he not only probably bigger than the
teacher I94

Page 180

(the kind of teacher that would be teaching a oneiroom country school in
a nest of Tidewater plantations) but a good deal more of a man, who
probably brought into the school with him along with his sober watchful
mountain reserve a good deal of latent insubordination that he would not
be aware of any more than he would be aware at first that the teacher
was afraid of him. It would not be intractability and maybe you couldn't
call it pride either, but maybe just the self reliance of mountains and
solitude, since some of his blood at least (his mother was a mountain
woman, a Scottish woman who, so he told Grandfather, never did quite
learn to speak English) had been bred in mountains, but which, whatever
it was, was that which forbade him to condescend to memorise dry sums
and such but which did permit him to listen when the teacher read
aloud.*Sent to school, 'where,â he told Grandfather, 'I learned little
save that most of the deeds, good and bad both, incurring opprobrium or
plaudits or reward either, within the scope of man's abilities, had
already been performed and were to be learned about only from books. So
I listened when he would read to us. I realise now that on most of these
occasions he resorted to reading aloud only when he saw that the moment
had come when his entire school was on the point of rising and leaving
the room. But whatever the reason, he read to us and I anyway listened,
though I did not know that in that listening I was equipping myself
better for what I should later design to do than if I had learned all
the addition and subtraction in the book. That was how I learned of the
West Indies. Not where they were, though if I had known at the time that
that knowledge would someday serve me, I would have learned that too.
What I learned was that there was a place called the West Indies to
which poor men went in ships and became rich, it didn't matter how, so
long as that man was clever and courageous: the latter of which I
believed that I possessed, the former of which I believed that, if it
were to be learned by energy and will in the school of endeavor and
experience, I should learn. I remember how I remained one afternoon when
school was out and waited for the teacher, waylaid him (he was a
smallish man who always looked dusty, as if he had been born and lived
all his life in attics and store rooms) and stepped out. I recall how he
started back when he saw me and how I thought at the time that if I were
to strike him there would be no resulting outcry but merely the 195

Page 181

time, Grandfather said, he probably could not have believed in anything
that was easy.)*he said, 'There it is' and got up and they all went on
and found where the architect had come back to the ground again, with a
gain of almost three hours. So they had to go fast now and there wasn't
much time to talk, or at least, Grandfather said, he did not appear to
intend to resume. Then the sun went down and the other men had to start
back to town; they all went except Grandfather, because he wanted to
listen some more. So he sent word in by one of the others (he was not
married then either) that he would not be home, and he and Sutpen went
on until the light failed. Two of the niggers (they were thirteen miles
from Sutpen's camp then) had already gone back to get blankets and more
grub. Then it was dark and the niggers began to light pine knots and
they went on for a little while 197

Page 182

yet, gaining what they could now since they knew that the architect
would have had to den soon after dark to keep from traveling in a
circle. That was how Grandfather remembered it: he and Sutpen leading
their horses (he would look back now and then and see the horses' eyes
shining in the torch light and the horses' heads tossing and the shadows
slipping along their shoulders and flanks) and the dogs and the niggers
(the niggers mostly still naked except for a pair of pants here and
there) with the pine torches smoking and flaring above them and the red
light on their round heads and arms and the mud they wore in the swamp
to keep the mosquitoes off dried hard and shiny, glinting like glass or
china and the shadows they cast taller than they were at one moment then
gone the next and even the trees and brakes and thickets there one
moment and gone the next though you knew all the time that they were
still there because you could feel them with your breathing, as though,
invisible, they pressed down and condensed the invisible air you
breathed. And he said how Sutpen was talking about it again, telling him
again before he realised that this was some more of it, and he said how
he thought how there was something about a man's destiny (or about the
man) that caused the destiny to shape itself to him like his clothes
did, like the same coat that new might have fitted a thousand men, yet
after one man has worn it for a while it fits no one else and you can
tell it anywhere you see it even if all you see is a sleeve or a lapel:
so that his*" ("the demon's," Shreve said) "idestiny had fitted itself
to him, to his innocence , his pristine aptitude for platform drama and
childlike heroic simplicity just as the fine broadcloth uniform which
you could have seen on ten thousand men during those four years, which
he wore when he came in the office on that afternoon thirty years later
had fitted itself to the swaggering of all his gestures and to the
forensic verbiage in which he stated calmly, with that frank innocence
which we call 'of a child' except that a human child is the only living
creature that is never either frank or innocent, the most simple and the
most outrageous things. He was telling some more of it, already into
what he was telling yet still without telling how he got to where he was
nor even how what he was now involved in (obviously at least twenty
years old now, crouching behind a window in the dark and firing the
muskets through it which someone else loaded and handed to him) came to
occur, getting himself 1 q8

Page 183

that, had decided to go to the West Indies and become rich, and this
night when, overseer or foreman or something to a French sugar planter,
he was barricade in the house with the planter's family (and now
Grandfather said there was the first mentionia shadow that almost
emerged for a moment and then faded again but not completely awayiof
thei" ("It's a girl," Shreve said. "Dont tell me. Just go on.") " whom
he was to tell Grandfather thirty years afterward he had found
unsuitable to his purpose and so put aside, though providing for her)
and a few frightened halfibreed servants which he would have to turn
from the window from time to time and kick and curse into helping the
girl load the muskets which he and the planter fired through the
windows, and I reckon Grandfather was saying âWait wait for God's sake
wait' about like you are until he finally did stop and back up and start
over again with at least some regard for cause and effect even if none
for logical sequence and continuity. Or maybe it was the fact that they
were sitting again now, having decided that they had gone far enough for
that night, and the niggers had made camp and cooked supper and they (he
and Grandfather) drank some of the whiskey and ate and then sat before
the fire drinking some more of the whiskey and he telling it all over
and still it was not absolutely clearithe how and the why he was there
and what he wasisince he was not talking about himself. He was telling a
story. He was not bragging about something he had done; he was just
telling a story about something a man named Thomas Sutpen had
experienced, which would still have been the same story if the man had
had no name at all, if it had been told about any man or no man over
whiskey at night. "That may have been what slowed him down. But it was
not enough to clarify the story much. He still was not recounting to
Grandfather the career of somebody named Thomas Sutpen. Grandfather said
the only mention he ever made to those six or seven years which must
have 199

Page 184

existed somewhere, must have actually occurred, was about the patois he
had to learn in order to oversee the plantation, and the French he had
to learn, maybe not to get engaged to be married, but which he would
certainly need to be able to repudiate the wife after he had already got
herihow, so he told Grandfather, he had believed that courage and
shrewdness would be enough but found that he was wrong and how sorry he
was that he had not taken the schooling along with the West Indian lore
when he discovered that all people did not speak the same tongue and
realised that he would not only need courage and skill, he would have to
learn to speak a new language, else that design to which he had
dedicated himself would die stilliborn. So he learned the language just
like he learned to be a sailor I reckon, because Grandfather asked him
why he didn't get himself a girl to live with and learn it the easy way
and Grandfather said how he remembered then that he had seen Sutpen each
time decline sugar for his coffee and so he 200

Page 185

went with the dogs and the niggers because Sutpen was afraid the niggers
might catch the architect before he could reach them. He and Grandfather
had to walk a good deal, sending one of the niggers to lead the horses
on around the bad places until they could ride again. Grandfather said
it was fine weather and the trail lay pretty good but he said it would
have been fine if the architect had just was all it was to hima
spectacle, something to be watched because he might not have a chance to
see such again, since his innocence still functioned and he not only did
not know what fear was until afterward, he did not even know that at
first he was not terrified; did not even know that he had found the
place where money was to be had quick if you were courageous and shrewd
(he did not mean shrewdness, Grandfather said. What he meant was
unscrupulousness only he didn't know that word because it would not have
been in the book from which the school teacher read. Or maybe that was
what he meant by courage, Grandfather said) but where high mortality was
concomitant with the money and the sheen on the 201

Page 186

dollars was not from gold but from bloodia spot of earth which might
have been created and set aside by Heaven itself, Grandfather said, as a
theatre for violence and injustice and bloodshed and all the satanic
lusts of human greed and cruelty, for the last despairing fury of all
the pariahiinterdict and all the doomedia little island set in a smiling
and furyilurked and incredible indigo sea, which was the halfway point
between what we call the jungle and what we call civilization, halfway
between the dark inscrutable continent from which the black blood, the
black bones and flesh and thinking and remembering and hopes had cured
the disease, waking from the fever without even knowing that it had been
the fever itself which they had fought against and not the sickness,
looking with stubborn recalcitrance backward beyond the fever and into
the disease with actual regret, weak from the fever yet free of the
disease and not even aware that the freedom was that of impotence. ("But
why tell me about it?" he said to his father that evening, when he
returned home, after she had dismissed him at last with his promise to
return for her in the buggy; "why tell me about it? What is it to me
that the land or the earth or whatever it was got tired of him at last
and turned and destroyed him? What if it did destroy her family too?
It's going to turn and destroy us all someday, whether our name happens
to be Sutpen or Coldfield or not." "Ah," Mr Compson said. "Years ago we
in the South made our women into ladies. Then the War came and made the
ladies into ghosts. So what else can we do, being gentlemen, but listen
to them being

Page 187

believed (Grandfather said) that earth was kind and gentle and that
darkness was merely something you saw, or could not see in; overseeing
what he oversaw and not knowing that he was overseeing it, making his
daily expeditions from an armed citadel until the day itself came. And
he not telling that either, how that day happened, the steps leading up
to it because Grandfather said he apparently did not know, comprehend,
what he must have been seeing every day because of that innocencei a
pig's bone with a little rotten flesh still clinging to it, a few
chicken feathers, a stained dirty rag with a few pebbles tied up in it
found on the old man's pillow one morning and none knew (least of all,
the planter himself who had been asleep on the pillow) how it had come
there because they learned at the same time that all the servants, the
half breeds, were missing, and he did not know until the planter told
him that the stains on the rag were neither dirt nor grease but blood,
nor that what he took to be the planter's gallic rage was actually fear,
terror, and he just curious and quite interested because he still looked
upon the planter and the daughter both (he told Grandfather how until
that first night of the siege he had not once thought that he did not
know the girl's christian name, whether he had ever heard it or not. He
also told Grandfather, dropped this into the telling as you might flick
the joker out of a pack of fresh cards without being able to remember
later whether you had removed the joker or not, that the old man's wife
had been a Spaniard, and so it was Grandfather and not Sutpen who
realised that until that first night of the attack he had possibly not
seen the girl as much as a dozen times) as foreigners; the body of one
of the half breeds found at last (he found it, hunted for it for two
days without even knowing that what he was meeting was a blank wall of
black secret faces, a wall behind which almost anything could be
preparing to happen and, as he learned later, almost anything was, and
on the third day found the body where he could not possibly have missed
it during the first hour of the first day if it had been there) and he
sitting on the log, Grandfather said, telling it, making the gestures to
tell it with, whom Grandfather himself had seen fight naked chest to
chest with one of his wild niggers by the light of the camp fire while
his house was building and who still fought with them by lantern light
in the stable after he had got at last that wife who would be adjunctive
to the forwarding of that z03

Page 188

design he had in mind, and no bones about the fighting either, no
handshaking and gratulations while he washed the blood off and donned
his shirt because at the end of it the nigger would be flat on his back
with his chest heaving and another nigger throwing water on him; sitting
there and telling Grandfather how at last he found the half breed, or
what used to be the half breed, and that he (Sutpen) had seen as much as
most men and had done as much as most, including some things which he
did not boast about: but that there were some things which a man who
pretended to be civilised saw when he had to but which he did not talk
about, so he would only say that he found the half breed at last and so
began to comprehend that the situation might become serious; then the
house, the barricade, the five of themithe planter, the daughter, two
women servants and himselfishut up in it and the air filled with the
smoke and smell of burning cane and the glare and smoke of it on the sky
and the air throbbing and trembling with the drums and the chantingithe
little lost island beneath its downicupped bowl of alternating day and
night like a vacuum into which no help could come, where not even winds
from the outer world came but only the trades, the same weary winds
blowing back and forth across it and burdened still with the weary
voices of murdered women and children homeless and graveless about the
isolating and solitary seaiwhile the two servants and the girl whose
christian name he did not yet know loaded the muskets which he and the
father fired at no enemy but at the Haitian night itself, lancing their
little vain and puny flashes into the brooding and bloodiweary and
throbbing darkness: and it the very time of year, the season between
hurricanes and any hope of rain: and how on the eighth night the water
gave out and something had to be done so he put the musket down and went
out and subdued them. That was how he told it: he went out and subdued
them, and when he returned he and the girl became engaged to marry and
Grandfather saying 'Wait wait' sure enough now, saying, 'But you didn't
even know her; you told me that when the siege began you didn't even
know her name' and he looked at Grandfather and said, 'Yes. But you see,
it took me some time to recover.â Not how he did it. He didn't tell that
either, that of no moment to the story either; he just put the musket
down and had someone unbar the door and then bar it behind him, and
walked out zoo

Page 189

into the darkness and subdued them, maybe by yelling louder, maybe by
standing, bearing more than they believed any bones and flesh could or
should (should, yes: that would be the terrible thing: to find flesh to
stand more than flesh should be asked to stand); maybe at last they
themselves turning in horror and fleeing from the white arms and legs
shaped like theirs and from which blood could be made to spurt and flow
as it could from theirs and containing an indomitable spirit which
should have come from the same primary fire which theirs came from but
which could not have, could not possibly have (he showed Grandfather the
scars, one of which, Grandfather said, came pretty near leaving him that
virgin for the rest of his life too) and then daylight came with no
drums in it for the first time in eight days, and they emerged (probably
the man and the daughter) and walked across the burned land with the
bright sun shining down on it as if nothing had happened, walking now in
what must have been an incredible desolate solitude and peaceful quiet,
and found him and brought him to the house: and when he recovered he and
the girl were engaged. Then he stopped." "All right," Shreve said. "Go
on." "I said he stopped," Quentin said. "I heard you. Stopped what? How
got engaged and then stopped yet still had a wife to repudiate later?
You said he didn't remember how he got to Haiti, and then he didn't
remember how he got into the house with the niggers surrounding it. Now
are you going to tell me he didn't even remember getting married? That
he got engaged and then he decided he would stop, only one day he found
out he hadn't stopped but on the contrary he was married? And all you
called him was just a virgin?" "He stopped talking, telling it," Quentin
said. He had not moved, talking apparently (if to anything) to the
letter lying on the open book on the table between his hands. Opposite
him Shreve had filled the pipe and smoked it out again. It lay again
overturned, a scattering of white ashes fanning out from the bowl, onto
the table before his crossed naked arms with which he appeared at the
same time both to support and hug himself, since although it was only
eleven oclock the room was beginning to cool toward that point where
about midnight there would be only enough heat in the radiators to keep
the pipes from freezing, though (he 205

Page 190

who came, a little wildieyed and considerably slackimouthed, into the
Holston House bar one evening and said, 'Boys, this time he stole the
whole durn steamboat!â "So at last civic virtue came to a boil. One day
and with the sheriff of the county among them, a party of eight or ten
took the road out to Sutpen's Hundred. They did not go all the way
because about six miles from town they met Sutpen himself. He was riding
the roan horse, in the frock coat and the beaver hat which they knew and
with his legs wrapped in a piece of tarpaulin; he had a portmanteau on
his pommel and he was carrying a small woven basket on his arm. He
stopped the roan (it was April then, and the road was still a quagmire)
and sat there in his splashed tarpaulin and looked from one face to the
next; your grandfather said that his eyes looked like pieces of a broken
plate and that his beard was strong as a curryicomb. That was how he put
it: strong as a curryicomb. 'Good morning, gentlemen,â he said. 'Were
you looking for me?â "Doubtless something more than this transpired at
the time, though none of the vigilance committee ever told it that I
know of. All I ever heard is how the town, the men on the gallery of the
Holston House saw Sutpen and the committee ride onto the square
together, Sutpen a little in front and the others bunched behind
him*Sutpen with his legs and feet wrapped neatly in his tarpaulin and
his shoulders squared inside the worn broadcloth coat and that worn
brushed beaver cocked a little, talking to them over his shoulder and
those eyes hard and pale and reckless and probably quizzical and maybe
contemptuous even then. He pulled up at the door and the negro hostler
ducked out and took the roan's head and Sutpen got down, with his
portmanteau and the basket and mounted the steps, and I heard how he
turned there and looked at them again where they huddled on their
horses, not knowing what to do exactly. And it might have been a good
thing that he had that beard and they could not see his mouth. Then he
turned, and he looked at the other men sitting with their feet on the
railing and watching him too, men who used to come out to his place and
sleep on the floor and hunt with him, and he saluted them with that
florid, swaggering gesture to the hat (yes, he was underbred. It showed
like this always, your grandfather said, in all his formal contacts with
people. He was like John L. 34

Page 191

Grandfather said the architect took the new hat and looked at it and
burst into tears.*a little harried wildifaced man with a twoidays'
stubble of beard, who came out of the cave fighting like a wildcat, hurt
leg and all, with the dogs barking and the niggers whooping and
hollering with deadly and merry anticipation, like they were under the
impression that since the race had lasted more than twentyifour hours
the rules would be automatically abrogated and they would not have to
wait to cook him until Sutpen waded in with a short stick and beat
niggers and dogs all away, leaving the architect standing there, not
scared worth a damn either, just panting a little and Grandfather said a
little sick in the face where the niggers had mishandled his leg in the
heat of the capture, and making them a speech in French, a long one and
so fast that Grandfather said probably another Frenchman could not have
understood all of it. But it sounded fine; Grandfather said even heiall
of themicould tell that the architect was not apologising; it was fine,
Grandfather said, and he said how Sutpen turned toward him but he
(Grandfather) was already approaching the architect, holding out the
bottle of whiskey already uncorked. And Grandfather saw the eyes in the
gaunt face, the eyes desperate and hopeless but indomitable too,
invincible too, not beaten yet by a damn sight Grandfather said, and all
that fiftyiodd hours of dark and swamp and sleeplessness and fatigue and
no grub and nowhere to go and no hope of getting there: just a will to
endure and a foreknowing of defeat but not beat yet by a damn sight: and
he took the bottle in one of his little dirty coonilike hands and raised
the other hand and even fumbled about his head for a second before he
remembered that the hat was gone, then flung the hand up in a gesture
that Grandfather said you simply could not describe, that seemed to
gather all misfortune and defeat that the human race ever suffered into
a little pinch in his fingers like dust and fling it backward over his
head, and raised the bottle and bowed first to Grandfather then to all
the other men sitting their horses in a circle and looking at him, and
then he took not only the first drink of neat whiskey he ever took in
his life but the drink of it that he could no more have conceived
himself taking than the Brahmin can believe that that situation can
conceivably arise in which he will eat dog." 2 o7

Page 192

store and watched his wagonload of stock double maybe every ten years or
at least not lose any ground and seen the chance to do that very same
thing all the time, only his conscience (not his courage: Father said he
had plenty of that) wouldn't let him. Then Sutpen came along and offered
to do it, he and Mr Coldfield to divide the loot if it worked, and he
(Sutpen) to take all the blame if it didn't. And Mr Coldfield let him.
Father said it was because Mr Coldfield did not believe it would work,
that they would get away with it, only he couldn't quit thinking about
it, and so when they tried it and it failed he (Mr Goldfield) would be
able to get it out of his mind then; and that when it did fail and they
were caught, Mr Coldfield would insist on taking his share of the blame
as penance and expiation for having sinned in his mind all those years.
Because Mr Coldfield never did believe it would work, so when he saw
that it was going to work, had worked, the least thing he could do was
to refuse to take his share of the profits; that when he saw that it had
worked it was his conscience he hated, not Sutpen; his conscience and
the land, the country which had created his conscience and then offered
the opportunity to have made all that money to the conscience which it
had created, which could do nothing but decline; hated that country so
much that he was even glad when he saw it drifting closer and closer to
a doomed and fatal war; that he would have joined the Yankee army,
Father said, only he was not a soldier and knew that he would either be
killed or die of hardship and so not be present on that day when the
South would realise that it was now paying the price for having erected
its economic edifice not on the rock of stern morality but on the
shifting sands of opportunism and moral brigandage. So he chose the only
gesture he could think of to impress his disapproval on those who should

outlive the fighting and so participate in the remorsei" "Sure," Shreve
said. "That's fine. But Sutpen. The design. Get on, now." "Yes," Quentin
said. "The design.77Getting richer and richer. It must have looked fine

and clear ahead for him now: house finished, and even bigger and whiter
than the one he had gone to the door of that day and the nigger came in
his monkey clothes and told him to go to the back, and he with his own
brand of niggers even, which the man who lay in the hammock with his
shoes off didn't have, to cull one from fog

Page 193

and train him to go to the door when his turn came for a little boy
without any shoes on and with his pap's cutdown pants for clothes to
come and knock on it. Only Father said that that wasn't it now, that
when he came to Grandfathers office that day after the thirty years, and
not trying to excuse now anymore than he had tried in the bottom that
night when they ran the architect, but just to explain now, trying hard
to explain now because now he was old and knew it, knew it was being old
that he had to talk against: time shortening ahead of him that could and
would do things to his chances and possibilities even if he had no more
doubt of his bones and flesh than he did of his will and courage,
telling Grandfather that the boyâsymbol at the door wasn't it because
the boyâsymbol was just the figment of the amazed and desperate child;
that now he would take that boy in where he would never again need to
stand on the outside of a white door and knock at it: and not at all for
mere shelter but so that that boy, that whatever nameless stranger,
could shut that door himself forever behind him on all that he had ever
known, and look ahead along the still undivulged light rays in which his
descendants who might not even ever hear his (the boy's) name, waited to
be born without even having to know that they had once been riven
forever free from brutehood just as his own (Sutpen's) children were
"Dont say it's just me that sounds like your old man," Shreve said. "But
go on. Sutpen's children. Go on." "Yes," Quentin said. "The two
children" thinking Yes. Maybe we are both Father. Maybe nothing ever
happens once and is finished. Maybe happen is never once but like
ripples maybe on water after the pebble sinks, the ripples moving on,
spreading, the pool attached by a narrow umbilical watericord to the
next pool which the first pool feeds, has fed, did feed, let this second
pool contain a different temperature of water, a different molecularity
of having seen, felt, remembered, reflect in a different tone the
infinite unchanging sky, it doesn't matter. that pebble's watery echo
whose fall it did not even see moves across its surface too at the
original rippleispace, to the old ineradicable rhythm thinking Yes, we
are both Father. Or maybe Father and l are both Shreve, maybe it took
Father and me both to make Shreve or Shreve and me both to make Father
or maybe Thomas Sutpen to make all 0 f us. "Yes, the two 210

Page 194

only the twenty niggers out of all he might have claimed and which many
another man in his place would have insisted upon keeping and (in which
contention) would have been supported by both legal and moral sanction
even if not the delicate one of conscience: and Grandfather not saying
âWait wait' now because it was that innocence again, that innocence
which believed that the ingredients of morality were like the
ingredients of pie or cake and once you had measured them and balanced
them and mixed them and put 2 ii

Page 195

have warranted you in the belief that you could but justice?â " It was
at this point that Shreve went to the bedroom and put on the bathrobe.
He did not say Wait, he just rose and left Quentin sitting before the
table, the open book and the letter, and went out and returned in the
robe and sat again and took up the cold pipe, though without filling it
anew or lighting it as it was. "All right," he said. "So that Christmas
Henry brought him home, into the house, and the demon looked up and saw
the face he believed he had paid off and discharged twentyieight years
ago. Go on." "Yes," Quentin said. "Father said he probably named him
himself. Charles Bon. Charles Good. He didn't tell Grandfather that he
did, but Grandfather believed he did, would ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 196

the design even though he could have closed his eyes and, if not fooled
the rest of the world as they had fooled him, at least have frightened
any man out of speaking the secret aloudithe same conscience which would
not permit the child, since it was a boy, to bear either his name or
that of its maternal grandfather, yet which would also forbid him to do
the customary and provide a quick husband for the discarded woman and so
give his son an authentic name. He chose the name himself , Grandfather
believed, just as he named them allithe Charles Goods and the
Clytemnestras and Henry and Judith and all of them* that entire
fecundity of dragons' teeth as Father called it. And Father said "Your
father," Shreve said. "He seems to have got an awful lot of delayed
information awful quick, after having waited fortyifive years. If he
knew all this, what was his reason for telling you that the trouble

between Henry and Bon was the octoroon woman?" "He didn't know it then.
Grandfather didn't tell him all of it either, like Sutpen never told
Grandfather quite all of it." "Then who did tell him?" "I did." Quentin

did not move, did not look up while Shreve watched him. "The day after
we after that night when we "Oh," Shreve said. "After you and the old
aunt. I see. Go on. And Father said said how he must have stood there on
the front gallery that afternoon and waited for Henry and the friend
Henry had been writing home about all fall to come up the drive, and
that maybe after Henry wrote the name in the first letter Sutpen
probably told himself it couldn't be, that there was a limit even to
irony beyond which it became either just vicious but not fatal horseplay
or harmless coincidence, since Father said that even Sutpen probably
knew that nobody yet ever invented a name that somebody didn't own now
or hadn't owned once: and they rode up at last and Henry said, 'Father,
this is Charles' and he*" ("the demon," Shreve said) "*saw the face and
knew that there are situations where coincidence is no more than the
little child that rushes out onto a football field to take part in the
game and the players run over and around the unscathed head and go on
and shock together and in the fury of the struggle for the facts called
gain or loss zi4

Page 197

nobody even remembers the child nor saw who came and snatched it back
from dissolution; that he stood there at his own door, just as he had
imagined, planned, designed, and sure enough and after fifty years the
forlorn nameless and homeless lost child came to knock at it and no
monkeyidressed nigger anywhere under the sun to come to the door and
order the child away; and Father said that even then, even though he
knew that Bon and Judith had never laid eyes on one another, he must
have felt and heard the designihouse, position, posterity and allicome
down like it had been built out of smoke, making no sound, creating no
rush of displaced air and not even leaving any debris. And he not
calling it retribution, no sins of the father come home to roost; not
even calling it bad luck, but just a mistake: that mistake which he
could not discover himself and which he came to Grandfather, not to
excuse but just to review the facts for an impartial (and Grandfather
said he believed, a legally trained) mind to examine and find and point
out to him. Not moral retribution you see: just an old mistake in fact
which a man of courage and shrewdness (the one of which he now knew he
possessed, the other of which he believed that he had now learned,
acquired) could still combat if he could only find out what the mistake
had been. Because he did not give up. He never did give up; Grandfather
said that his subsequent actions (the fact that for a time he did
nothing and so perhaps helped to bring about the very situation which he
dreaded) were not the result of any failing of courage or shrewdness or
ruthlessness, but were the result of his conviction that it had all come
from a mistake and until he discovered what that mistake had been he did
not intend to risk making another one. "So he invited Bon into the
house, and for the two weeks of the vacation (only it didn't take that
long; Father said that probably Mrs Sutpen had Judith and Bon already
engaged from the moment she saw Bon's name in Henry's first letter) he
watched Bon and Henry and Judith, or watched Bon and Judith rather
because he would have already known about Henry and Bon from Henry's
letters about him from the school; watched them for two weeks, and did
nothing. Then Henry and Bon went back to school and now the nigger groom
that fetched the mail back and forth each week between Oxford and
Sutpen's Hundred brought letters to Judith now that were not in Henry's
hand (and that 2 is

Page 198

not necessary either, Father said, because Mrs Sutpen was already
covering the town and county both with news of that engagement that
Father said didn't exist yet) and still he did nothing. He didn't do
anything at all until spring was almost over and Henry wrote that he was
bringing Bon home with him to stay a day or two before Bon went home.
Then Sutpen went to New Orleans. Whether he chose that time to go in
order to get Bon and his mother together and thrash the business out for
good and all or not, nobody knows, just as nobody knows whether he ever
saw the mother or not while he was there, if she received him or refused
to receive him; or if she did and he tried once more to come to terms
with her, buy her off maybe with money now, since Father said that a man
who could believe that a scorned and outraged and angry woman could be
bought off with formal logic would believe that she could be placated
with money too, and it didn't work; or if Bon was there and it was Bon
himself who refused the offer, though nobody ever did know if Bon ever
knew Sutpen was his father or not, whether he was trying to revenge his
mother or not at first and only later fell in love, only later succumbed
to the current of retribution and fatality which Miss Rosa said Sutpen
had started and had doomed all his blood to, black and white both. But
it didn't work evidently, and the next Christmas came and Henry and Bon
came to Sutpen's Hundred again and now Sutpen saw that there was no help
for it, that Judith was in love with Bon and whether Bon wanted revenge
or was just caught and sunk and doomed too, it was all the same. So it
seems that he sent for Henry that Christmas eve just before supper time
(Father said that maybe by now, after his New Orleans trip, he had
learned at last enough about women to know it wouldn't do any good to go
to Judith first) and told Henry. And he knew what Henry would say and
Henry said it and he took the lie from his son and Henry knew by his
father taking the lie that what his father had told him was true, and
Father said that he (Sutpen) probably knew what Henry would do too and
counted on Henry doing it because he still believed that it had been
only a minor tactical mistake, and so he was like a skirmisher who is
outnumbered yet cannot retreat who believes that if he is just patient
enough and clever enough and calm enough and alert enough he can get the
enemy scattered and pick them off one by one. And Henry did it. And he
(Sutpen) probably knew what Henry zi6

Page 199

the day he came to the office, his*" ("the demon's," Shreve said) "ione
day of leave at home, came home with his tombstones and Judith was there
and I reckon he looked at her and she looked at him and he said, âYou

know where he is' and Judith didn't lie to him, and (he knew Henry) he
said, âBut you have not heard from him yet' and Judith didn't lie about
that either and she didn't cry either because both of them knew what
would be in the letter when it came so he didn't have to ask, âWhen he
writes you that he is coming, you and Clytie will start making the
wedding dress' even if Judith would 2 i7

Page 200

have lied to him about that, which she would not have: so he put one of
the stones on Ellen's grave and set the other one up in the hall and
came in to see Grandfather, trying to explain it, seeing if Grandfather
could discover that mistake which he believed was the sole cause of his
problem, sitting there in his worn and shabby uniform, with his worn
gauntlets and faded sash and (he would have had the plume by all means.
He might have had to discard his sabre, but he would have had the plume)
the plume in his hat broken and frayed and soiled, with his horse
saddled and waiting in the street below and a thousand miles to ride to
find his regiment, yet he sitting there on the one afternoon of his
leave as though he had a thousand of them, as if there were no haste nor
urgency anywhere under the sun and that when he departed he had no
further to go than the twelve miles out to Sutpen's Hundred and a
thousand days or maybe even years of monotony and rich peace, and he,
even after he would become dead, still there, still watching the fine
grandsons and greatigrandsons springing as far as eye could reach; he
still, even though dead in the earth, that same fine figure of a man
that Wash Jones called him, but not now. Now fogbound by his own private
embattlement of personal morality: that picayune splitting of abstract
hairs while (Grandfather said) Rome vanished and Jericho crumbled, that
this would be right i f or that would be wrong but of slowing blood and
stiffening bones and arteries that Father says men resort to in senility
who while young and supple and strong reacted to a single simple Yes and
a single simple No as instantaneous and complete and unthinking as the
snapping on and off of electricity, sitting there and talking and now
Grandfather not knowing what he was talking about because now
Grandfather said he did not believe that Sutpen himself knew because
even yet Sutpen had not quite told him all of it. And this that morality
again, Grandfather said: that morality which would not permit him to
malign or traduce the memory of his first wife, or at least the memory
of the marriage even though he felt that he had been tricked by it, not
even to an acquaintance in whose confidence and discretion he trusted
enough to wish to justify himself, not even to his son by another
marriage in order to preserve the status of his life's attainment and
desire, except as a last resort. Not that he would hesitate then,
Grandfather said: but not until then. He had been tricked by it himself,
2 i8

Page 201

but he had extricated himself without asking or receiving help from any
man; let anyone else who might be so imposed upon do the same.* and plan
to which he had given fifty years of his life had just as well never
have existed at all by almost exactly fifty years, and Grandfather not
knowing what choice he was talking about even, what second choice he was
faced with until the very last word he spoke before he got up and put on
his hat and shook Grandfathers left hand and rode away; this second
choice, need to choose, as obscure to Grandfather as the reason for the
first, the repudiation , had been: so that Grandfather did not ..ERR,
CODzlâ

Page 202

negation. I chose, and I made to the fullest what atonement lay in my
power for whatever injury I might have done in choosing, paying even
more for the privilege of choosing as I chose than I might have been
expected to, or even (by law) required. Yet I am now faced with a second
necessity to choose, the curious factor of which is not, as you pointed
out and as first appeared to me, that the necessity for a new choice
should have arisen, but that either choice which I might make, either
course which I might choose, leads to the same result: either I destroy
my design with my own hand, which will happen if I am forced to play my
last trump card, or do nothing, let matters take the course which I know
they will take and see my design complete itself quite normally and
naturally and successfully to the public eye, yet to my own in such
fashion as to be a mockery and a betrayal of that little boy who
approached that door fifty years ago and was turned away, for whose
vindication the whole plan was conceived and carried forward to the
moment of this choice, this second choice devolving out of that first
one which in its turn was forced on me as the result of an agreement, an
arrangement which I had entered in good faith, concealing nothing, while
the other party or parties to it concealed from me the one very factor
which would destroy the entire plan and design which I had been working
toward, concealed it so well that it was not until after the child was
born that I discovered that this factor existed' "Your old man," Shreve
said. "When your grandfather was telling this to him, he didn't know any
more what your grandfather was talking about than your grandfather knew
what the demon was talking about when the demon told it to him, did he?
And when your old man told it to you, you wouldn't have known what
anybody was talking about if you hadn't been out there and seen Clytie.
Is that right?" "Yes," Quentin said. "Grandfather was the only friend he
had." "The demon had?" Quentin didn't answer, didn't move. It was cold
in the room now. The heat was almost gone out of the radiators: the cold
iron fluting stern signal and admonition for sleeping, the little death,
the renewal. It had been some time now since the chimes had rung eleven.
"All right," Shreve said. He was hugging himself into the bathrobe now
as he had formerly hugged himself inside his pink naked almost hairless
skin. "He chose. He chose lechery. So do I. But go on." His remark was
220

Page 203

not intended for flippancy nor even derogation. It was born (if from any
source) of that incorrigible unsentimental sentimentality of the young
which takes the form of hard and often crass levityito which, by the
way, Quentin paid no attention whatever, resuming as if he had never
been interrupted, his face still lowered, still brooding apparently on
the open letter upon the open book between his hands. "He left for
Virginia that night. Grandfather said how he went to the window and
watched him ride across the square on the gaunt black stallion, erect in
his faded gray, the hat with its broken plume cocked a little yet not
quite so much as the beaver of the old days, as if (Grandfather said)
even with his martial rank and prerogatives he did not quite swagger
like he used to do, not because he was chastened by misfortune or spent
or even wariwearied but as though even while riding he was still bemused
in that state in which he struggled to hold clear and free above a
maelstrom of unpredictable and unreasoning human beings, not his head
for breath and not so much his fifty years of effort and striving to
establish a posterity, but his code of logic and morality, his formula
and recipe of fact and deduction whose balanced sum and product
declined, refused to swim or even float;*saw him approach the Holston
House and saw old Mr McCaslin and two other old men hobble out and stop
him, he sitting the stallion and talking to them and his voice not
raised, Grandfather said, yet the very sober quality of his gestures and
the set of his shoulders forensic, oratorical. Then he went on. He could
still reach Sutpen's Hundred before dark, so it was probably after
supper that he headed the stallion toward the Atlantic Ocean, he and
Judith facing one another again for maybe a full minute, he not needing
to say âI will stop it if I can', she not needing to say âStop it
theniif you can' but just goodbye, the kiss on the brow and no tears; a
word to Clytie and to Wash: master to slave, baron to retainer: âWell,
Clytie, take care of Miss Judith.7Wash, I'll send you a piece of Abe
Lincoln's coat tail from Washington' and I reckon Wash answering like it
used to be under the scuppernongs with the demijohn and the well bucket:
âSho, Kernel; kill ever one of the varmints!â So he ate the hoecake and
drank the parched acorn coffee and rode away. Then it was '65 and the
army (Grandfather had gone back to it too; he was a brigadier now though
I reckon this was for more reason than because he just had one 2 2 l

Page 204

arm) had retreated across Georgia and into Carolina and they all knew it
wouldn't be very much longer now. Then one day Lee sent Johnston some
reinforcements from one of his corps and Grandfather found out that the
Twentyithird Mississippi was one of the regiments. And he (Grandfather)
didn't know what had happened: whether Sutpen had found out in some way
that Henry had at last coerced his conscience into agreeing with him as
his (Henry's) father had done thirty years ago, whether Judith perhaps
had written her father that she had heard from Bon at last and what she
and Bon intended to do, or if the four of them had just reached as one
person that point where something had to be done, had to happen, he
(Grandfather) didn't know. He just learned one morning that Sutpen had
ridden up to Grandfather's old regiment's headquarters and asked and
received permission to speak to Henry and did speak to him and then rode
away again before midnight." "So he got his choice made, after all,"
Shreve said. "He played that trump after all. And so he came home and
found*" "Wait," Quentin said. what he must have wanted to find or anyway
what he was going to find "Wait, I tell you!" Quentin said, though still
he did not move nor even raise his voiceithat voice with its tense
suffused restrained quality: "I am telling" Am I going to have to hear
it all again he thought I am going to have to hear it all over again I
am already hearing it all over again I am listening to it all over again
I shall have to never listen to anything else but this again forever so
apparently not only a man never outlives his father but not even his
friends and acquaintances do:*(that at least regarding which he should
have needed no word nor warning even if Judith would have sent him one,
sent him acknowledgement that she was beaten, who according to Mr
Compson would no more have sent him acknowledgement that he had beat her
than she waited (who Miss Coldfield said was not bereaved) and met him
on his return, not with the fury and despair perhaps which he might have
expected even though knowing as little, having learned as little, about
women as Mr Compson said he had, yet certainly with something other than
the icy calm with which, according to Miss Coldfield, she met himithe
kiss again after almost two years, on the brow; the voices, the
speeches, quiet, contained, 222

Page 205

almost impersonal: "Andi?" "Yes. Henry killed him" followed by the brief
tears which ceased on the instant when they began, as if the moisture
consisted of a single sheet or layer thin as a cigarette paper and in
the shape he returned, to meet him at the gate and say, 'Well, Kernel,
they kilt us but they aint whupped us yit, air they?â who even worked,
labored, sweat at the demon's behest during that first furious period
while the demon believed he could restore by sheer indomitable willing
the Sutpen's Hundred which he remembered and had lost, labored with no
hope of pay or reward who must have seen long before the demon did (or
would admit it) that the task was hopelessiblind Jones who apparently
saw still in that furious lecherous wreck the old fine figure of the man
who once galloped on the black thoroughbred about that domain two
boundaries of which the eye could not see from any point "Yes," Quentin
said. So that Sunday morning came and the demon up and away before dawn,
Judith thinking she knew why since that morning the black stallion which
he rode to Virginia and led back had a son born on his wife Penelope,
only it was not that foal which the demon had got up early to look at
and it was almost a week before they caught, found, the old i50

Page 206

have known she would do and would have known probably i f he had not
bogged himself again in his morality which had all the parts but which
refused to run, to move. Hence the proposal, the outrage and unbelief;
the tide, the blast o f indignation and anger upon which Miss Rosa
vanished from Sutpen's Hundred, her airiballooned skirts spread upon the
flood, chipilight, her bonnet (possibly one of Ellen's which she had
prowled out of the attic) clapped fast onto her head rigid and
precarious with rage. And he standing there with the reins over his arm,
with perhaps something like smiling inside his beard and about the eyes
which was not smiling but the crinkled concentration of furious
thinkingzithe haste, the need for it; the urgency but not fear, not
concern : just the fact that he had missed that time, though luckily it
was just a spotting shot with a light charge, and the old gun, the old
barrel and carriage none the worse; only next time there might not be
enough powder for both a spotting shot and then a fullisized load;*the
fact that the thread of shrewdness and courage and will ran onto the
same spool which the thread of his remaining days ran onto and that
spool almost near enough for him to reach out his hand and touch it. But
this was no grave concern yet, since it (the old logic, the old morality
which had never yet failed to fail him) was already falling into
pattern, already showing him conclusively that he had been right, just
as he knew he had been, and therefore what had happened was just a
delusion and did not actually exist) "No," Shreve said; "you wait. Let
me play a while now. Now, Wash. Him (the demon) standing there with the
horse, the saddled charger, zz4 ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 207

the sheathed sabre, the gray waiting to be laid peaceful away among the
moths and all lost save dishonor: then the voice of the faithful
gravedigger who opened the play and would close it, coming out of the
wings like Shakespeare's very self: âWell, Kernel, they mought have
whupped us but they aint kilt us yit, air they?'*" This was not
flippancy either. It too was just that protective coloring of levity
behind which the youthful shame of being moved hid itself, out of which
Quentin also spoke, the reason for Quentin's sullen bemusement, the (on
both their parts) flipness, the strained clowning: the two of them,
whether they knew it or not, in the cold room (it was quite cold now)
dedicated to that best of ratiocination which after all was a good deal
like Sutpen's morality and Miss Coldfield's demonisingithis room not
only dedicated to it but set aside for it and suitably so since it would
be here above any other place that it (the logic and the morality) could
do the least amount of harm; the two of them back to back as though at
the last ditch, saying No to Quentin's Mississippi shade who in life had
acted and reacted to the minimum of logic and morality, who dying had
escaped it completely, who dead remained not only indifferent but
impervious to it, somehow a thousand times more potent and alive. There
was no harm intended by Shreve and no harm taken, since Quentin did not
even stop. He did not even falter, taking Shreve up in stride without
comma or colon or paragraph: no reserve to risk a spotting shot with now
so he started this one like you start a rabbit out of a brier patch,
with a little chunk of dried mud thrown by hand. Maybe it was the first
string of beads out of his and Wash's little store where he would get
mad at his customers, the niggers and the trash and the haggling, and
turn them out and lock the door and drink himself blind. And maybe Wash
delivered the beads himself, Father said, that was down at the gate when
he rode back from the war that day, that after he went away with the
regiment would tell folks that he (Wash) was looking after Kernel's
place and niggers until after a while maybe he even believed it.
Father's mother said how when the Sutpen niggers first heard about what
he was saying, they would stop him in the road that came up out of the
bottom where the old fishing camp was that Sutpen let him and the
granddaughter (she was about eight then) live in. There would be too
many of them for him to whip 2 ZS

Page 208

them all, to even try to, risk trying to: and they would ask him why he
wasn't at the war and he would say, 'Git outen my road, niggers!â and
then it would be the outright laughing, asking one another (except it
was not one another but him): 'Who him, calling us niggers?â and he
would rush at them with a stick and them avoiding him just enough, not
mad at all, just laughing. And he was still carrying fish and animals he
killed (or maybe stole) and vegetables up to the house when that was
about all Mrs Sutpen and Judith (and Clytie too) had to live on, and
Clytie would not let him come into the kitchen with the basket even,
saying, 'Stop right there, white man. Stop right where you is. You aint
never crossed this door while Colonel was here and you aint going to
cross it now.' Which was true, only Father said there was a kind of
pride in it: that he had never tried to enter the house, even though he
believed that if he had tried, Sutpen would not have let them repulse
him; like (Father said) he might have said to himself The reason I wont
try it aint that I refuse to give any black nigger the chance to tell me
I cant but because I aint going to force Mister Tom to have to cuss a
nigger or take a cussing from his wife on my account But they would
drink together under the scuppernong arbor on the Sunday afternoons, and
on the week days he would see Sutpen (the fine figure of the man as he
called it) on the black stallion, galloping about the plantation, and
Father said how for that moment Wash's heart would be quiet and proud
both and that maybe it would seem to him that this world where niggers,
that the Bible said had been created and cursed by God to be brute and
vassal to all men of white skin, were better found and housed and even
clothed than he and his granddaughterithat this world where he walked
always in mocking and jeering echoes of nigger laughter, was just a
dream and an illusion and that the actual world was the one where his
own lonely apotheosis (Father said) galloped on the black thoroughbred,
thinking maybe, Father said, how the Book said that all men were created
in the image of God and so all men were the same in God's eyes anyway,
looked the same to God at least, and so he would look at Sutpen and
think A fine proud man. If God Himself was to come down and ride the
natural earth, that's what He would aim to look like. Maybe he even
delivered the first string of beads himself, and Father said maybe each
of the ribbons afterward during the next three years while the girl
matured fast zz6

Page 209

his heart was still quiet, even all, stopped the protestations and
disclaimers at all: âSho, now. Ef Kernel and Miss Judith wanted to give
hit to you, I hope you minded to thank them.'*Not alarmed, Father said:
just thoughtful, just grave; and Father said how that afternoon
Grandfather rode out to see Sutpen about something and there was nobody
in the front of the store and he was about to go out and go up to the
house when he heard the voices from the back and he walked on toward
them and so he overheard them before he could begin to not listen and
before he could make them hear him calling Sutpen's name. Grandfather
couldn't see them yet, he hadn't even got to where they could hear him
yet, but he said he knew exactly how they would be: Sutpen having
already told Wash to get the jug out and then Wash spoke and Sutpen
beginning to turn, realising that Wash wasn't getting the jug before he
comprehended the import of what Wash was saying, then comprehending that
and still half turned and then all of a sudden kind of ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 210

Sutpen said, 'What about the dress?â and Grandfather said it was
Sutpen's voice that was short and sharp: not Wash's; that Wash's voice
was just flat and quiet, not abject: just patient and slow: 'I have
knowed you for going on twenty years now. I aint never denied yit to do
what you told me to do. And I'm a man past sixty. And she aint nothing
but a fifteeniyeariold gal.' and Sutpen said, 'Meaning that I'd harm the
girl? I, a man as old as you are?â and Wash: 'If you was arra other man,
I'd say you was as old as me. And old or no old, I wouldn't let her keep
that dress nor nothing else that come from your hand. But you are
different.â and Sutpen: 'How different?â and Grandfather said how Wash
did not answer and that he called again now and neither of them heard
him; and then Sutpen said: 'So that's why you are afraid of me?â and
Wash said, 'I aint afraid. Because you are brave. It aint that you were
a brave man at one second or minute or hour of your life and got a paper
to show hit from General Lee. But you are brave, the same as you are
alive and breathing. That's where it's different. Hit dont need no
ticket from nobody to tell me that. And I know that whatever your hands
tech, whether hit's a regiment of men or a ignorant gal or just a hound
dog, that you will make hit right.â Then Grandfather heard Sutpen move,
sudden and sharp, and Grandfather said he reckoned, thought just about
what he imagined Wash was thinking. But all Sutpen said was, 'Get the
jug. :'Sho, Kernel,â Wash said. "So that Sunday came, a year after that
day and three years after he had suggested to Miss Rosa that they try it
first and if it was a boy and lived, they would be married. It was
before daylight and he was expecting his mare to foal to the black
stallion, so when he left the house before day that morning Judith
thought he was going to the stable, who knew what and how much about her
father and Wash's granddaughter nobody knew, how much she could not have
helped but know from what Clytie must have known (may have or may not
have told her, whether or no) since everybody else white or black in the
neighborhood knew who had ever seen the girl pass in the ribbons and
beads which they all recognised, how much she may have refused to
discover during the fitting and sewing of that dress (Father said Judith
actually did this; this was no lie that the girl told Wash: the two of
them alone all day long 228

Page 211

where maybe the granddaughter on the pallet asked querulously what it
was and he answered, âWhut? Whut racket, honey?â and maybe he tried to
persuade her to eat tooithe side meat he had probably brought home from
the store Saturday night or maybe the candy, trying to tempt her with it
maybeithe nickel's worth of stale jellified glue out of a striped sack,
and maybe ate himself and then sat at the window where he could look out
above the body and the scythe in the weeds below, and watch the road.
Because he was sitting there when the half grown boy came around the
corner of the house whistling and saw him. And Father said he must have
realised then that it would not be much after dark when it would happen;
that he must have sat there and sensed, felt them gathering with the
horses and dogs and gunsithe curious and the vengefulimen of Sutpen's
own kind, who used to eat at his table with him back when he (Wash) had
yet to approach nearer the house than the scuppernong arborimen who had
led the way, shown the other and lesser ones how to fight in battles,
who might also possess signed papers from the generals saying that they
were among the first and foremost of the braveiwho had galloped also in
the old days arrogant and proud on the fine horses about the fine
plantationsisymbol also of admiration and hope, instruments too of
despair and grief; these it was whom he was expected to run from and it
seeming to him probably that he had no less to run from than he had to
run to; that if he ran he would be fleeing merely one set of bragging
and evil shadows for another, since they (men) were all of a kind
throughout all of earth which he knew, and he old, too old to run far
even if he were to run who could never escape them, no matter how much
or how far he ran; a man past sixty could not expect to run that far,
far enough to escape beyond the boundaries of earth where such men
lived, set the order and the rule of living: and Father said that maybe
for the first time in his life he began to comprehend how it had been
possible for Yankees or any other army to have whipped themithe gallant,
the proud, the brave; the acknowledged and chosen best among them all to
bear the courage and honor and pride. It would probably be about sunset
now and probably he could feel them quite near now; Father said it
probably seemed to him that he could even hear them: all the voices, the
murmuring of tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow beyond the immediate
fury: Old Wash Jones 2 32

Page 212

come a tumble at last. He thought he had Sutpen, but Sutpen fooled him.
He thought he had him, but old Wash Jones got fooled and then maybe even
saying it aloud, shouting it Father said: 'But I never expected that,
Kernel! You know I never!â until maybe the granddaughter stirred and
spoke querulously again and he went and quieted her and returned to talk
to himself again but careful now, quiet now since Sutpen was close
enough to hear him easy, without shouting: 'You know I never. You know I
never expected or asked or wanted nothing from arra living man but what
I expected from you. And I never asked that. I didn't think hit would
need: I just said to myself I dont need to. What need has a fellow like
Wash Jones to question or doubt the man that General Lee himself said in
a handiwrote ticket that he was brave? Brave' (and maybe it would be
loud again, forgetting again) 'Brave! Better if narra one of them had
ever rid back in '65' thinking Better i f his kind and mine too had
never drawn the breath o f life on this earth. Better that all who
remain o f us be blasted from the face of it than that another Wash
Jones should see his whole life shredded from him and shrivel away like
a dried shuck thrown onto the fire Then they rode up. He must have been
listening to them as they came down the road, the dogs and the horses,
and seen the lanterns since it was dark now. And Major de Spain who was
sheriff then got down and saw the body, though he said he did not see
Wash nor know that he was there until Wash spoke his name quietly from
the window almost in his face: 'That you, Major?â De Spain told him to
come on out and he said how Wash's voice was quite quiet when he said he
would be out in just a minute; it was too quiet, too calm; so much too
quiet and calm that de Spain said he did not realise for a moment that

it was too calm and quiet: 'In just a minute. Soon as I see about my
granddaughter.â 'We'll see to her,' de Spain said. 'You come on out.'
'Sho, Major,â Wash said. 'In just a minute.â So they waited in front of

the dark house, and the next day Father said there were a hundred that
remembered about the butcher knife that he kept hidden and razor*
sharpithe one thing in his sloven life that he was ever known to take
pride in or care ofionly by the time they remembered all this it was too
late. So they didn't know what he was about. They just heard him moving
inside the dark house, then they heard the granddaughter's voice,
fretful and querulous: 'Who is it? Light the lamp, Grandpaw' then 233

Page 213

his voice: 'Hit wont need no light, honey. Hit wont take but a minute'
then de Spain drew his pistol and said, 'You, Wash! Come out of there!'
and still Wash didn't answer, murmuring still to the granddaughter:
'Where air you?â and the fretful voice answering, 'Right here. Where
else would I be? What is*' then de Spain said, 'Jones!â and he was
already fumbling at the broken steps when the granddaughter screamed;
and now all the men there claimed that they heard the knife on both the
neckbones, though de Spain didn't. He just said he knew that Wash had
come out onto the gallery and that he sprang back before he found out
that it was not toward him Wash was running but toward the end of the
gallery, where the body lay, but that he did not think about the scythe:
he just ran backward a few feet when he saw Wash stoop and rise again
and now Wash was running toward him. Only he was running toward them
all, de Spain said, running into the lanterns so that now they could see
the scythe raised above his head; they could see his face, his eyes too,
as he ran with the scythe above his head, straight into the lanterns and
the gun barrels, making no sound, no outcry while de Spain ran backward
before him, saying, 'Jones! Stop! Stop, or I'll kill you. Jones! Jones!
JONES!â " "Wait," Shreve said. "You mean that he got the son he wanted,
after all that trouble, and then turned right around and "Yes. Sitting
in Grandfather's office that afternoon, with his head kind of flung back
a little, explaining to Grandfather like he might have been explaining
arithmetic to Henry back in the fourth grade: 'You see, all I wanted was
just a son. Which seems to me, when I look about at my contemporary
scene, no exorbitant gift from nature or circumstance to demand '"Will
you wait?" Shreve said. "*that with the son he went to all that trouble
to get lying right there behind him in the cabin, he would have to taunt
the grandfather into killing first him and then the child too?" "*What?"
Quentin said. "It wasn't a son. It was a girl." "Oh," Shreve said.
"7Come on. Let's get out of this damn icebox and go to bed."

Page 214

T bere would be no deep breathing tonight. The window would remain
closed above the frozen and empty quad beyond which the windows in the
opposite wall were, with two or three exceptions, already dark; soon the
chimes would ring for midnight, the notes melodious and tranquil, faint
and clear as glass in the fierce (it had quit snowing) still air. "So
the old man sent the nigger for Henry," Shreve said. "And Henry came in
and the old man said 'They cannot marry because he is your brother' and
Henry said 'You lie' like that, that quick: no space, no interval, no
nothing between like when you press the button and get light in the
room. And the old man just sat there, didn't even move and strike him
and so Henry didn't say 'You lie' again because he knew now it was so;
he just said 'lt's not true', not 'I dont believe it' but 'lt's not
true' because he could maybe see the old man's face again now and demon
or no it was a kind of grief and pity, not for himself but for Henry,
because Henry was just young while he (the old man) knew that he still
had the courage and even all the shrewdness tooi" Shreve stood beside
the table, facing Quentin again though not seated now. In the overcoat
buttoned awry over the bathrobe he looked huge and shapeless like a
disheveled bear as he stared at Quentin (the Southerner , whose blood
ran quick to cool, more supple to compensate for violent changes of
temperature perhaps, perhaps merely nearer the surface) who sat hunched
in his chair, his hands thrust into his pockets 235

Page 215

as if he were trying to hug himself warm between his arms, looking
somehow fragile and even wan in the lamplight, the rosy glow which now
had nothing of warmth, coziness, in it, while both their breathing
vaporised faintly in the cold room where there was now not two of them
but four, the two who breathed not individuals now yet something both
more and less than twins, the heart and blood of youth (Shreve was
nineteen, a few months younger than Quentin. He looked exactly nineteen
; he was one of those people whose correct age you never know because
they look exactly that and so you tell yourself that he or she cannot
possibly be that because he or she looks too exactly that not to take
advantage of the appearance: so you never believe implicitly that he or
she is either that age which they claim or that which in sheer
desperation they agree to or which someone else reports them to be)
strong enough and willing enough for two, for two thousand, for all. Not
two of them in a New England college sittingiroom but one in a
Mississippi library sixty years ago, with holly and mistletoe in vases
on the mantel or thrust behind, crowning and garlanding with the season
and time the pictures on the walls, and a sprig or so decorating the
photograph , the groupimother and two childrenion the desk behind which
the father sat when the son entered; and theyiQuentin and Shreve*
thinking how after the father spoke and before what he said stopped
being shock and began to make sense, the son would recall later how he
had seen through the window beyond his father's head the sister and the
lover in the garden, pacing slowly, the sister's head bent with
listening, the lover's head leaned above it while they paced slowly on
in that rhythm which not the eyes but the heart marks and calls the beat
and measure for, to disappear slowly beyond some bush or shrub starred
with white bloomijasmine, spiraea, honeysuckle, perhaps myriad scentless
unpickable Cherokee rosesinames, blooms which Shreve possibly had never
heard and never seen although the air had blown over him first which
became tempered to nourish themiand it would not matter here that the
time had been winter in that garden too and hence no bloom nor leaf even
if there had been someone to walk there and be seen there since, judged
by subsequent events, it had been night in the garden also. But that did
not matter because it had been so long ago. It did not matter to them
(Quentin and Shreve) anyway, who could without movi 236

Page 216

ing, as free now of flesh as the father who decreed and forbade, the son
who denied and repudiated, the lover who acquiesced, the beloved who was
not bereaved, and with no tedious transition from hearth and garden
(granted the garden) to saddle, be already clattering over the frozen
ruts of that December night and that Christmas dawn, that day of peace
and cheer, of holly and goodwill and logs on the hearth; not two of them
there and then either but four of them riding the two horses through the
iron darkness and that not mattering either: what faces and what names
they called themselves and were called by so long as the blood
coursedithe blood, the immortal brief recent intransient blood which
could hold honor above slothy unregret and love above fat and easy
shame. "And Bon didn't know it," Shreve said. "The old man didn't move
and this time Henry didn't say 'You lie', he said 'lt's not true' and
the old man said, 'Ask him. Ask Charles then' and then Henry knew that
that was what his father had meant all the time and that that was what
he meant himself when he told his father he lied, because what the old
man said wasn't just 'He is your brother' but 'He has known all the time
that he is yours and your sister's brother'. But Bon didn't. Listen,
dont you remember how your father said it, about how not one time did he
*the old guy, the demoniever seem to wonder either how the other wife
managed to find him, track him down, had never once seemed to wonder
what she might have been doing all that time, how she might have passed
that time, the thirty years since that day when he paid his bill with
her and got it receipted, so he thought, and saw with his own eyes that
it was (so he thought) destroyed, torn up and thrown to the wind; never
once wondered about this but only that she had done it, had tracked him
down, could have and would have wanted to? So it wasn't her that told
Bon. She wouldn't have, maybe for the reason that she knew heithe
demoniwould believe she had. Or maybe she didn't get around to telling
him. Maybe she just never thought that there could be anyone as close to
her as a lone child out of her own body who would have to be told how
she had been scorned and suffered. Or maybe she was already telling it
before he was big enough to know words and so by the time he was big
enough to understand what was being told him she had told it so much and
so hard that the words didn't make sense 237

Page 217

to her anymore either because they didn't have to make sense to her, and
so she had got to the point where when she thought she was saying it she
was quiet, and when she thought she was quiet it was just the hate and
the fury and the unsleeping and the unforgetting. Or maybe she didn't
intend for him to know it then. Maybe she was grooming him for that hour
and moment which she couldn't foresee but that she knew would arrive
some day because it would have to arrive or else she would have to do
like the Aunt Rosa and deny that she had ever breathedi the moment when
he would stand side by side (not face to face) with his father where
fate or luck or justice or whatever she called it could do the rest (and
it did, better than she could have invented or hoped or even dreamed,
and your father said how being a woman she probably wasn't even
surprised)*grooming him herself, bringing him on by hand herself,
washing and feeding and putting him to bed and giving him the candy and
the toys and the other child's fun and diversion and needs in measured
doses like medicine with her own hand: not because she had to, who could
have hired a dozen or bought a hundred to do it for her with the money,
the jack that he (the demon) had voluntarily surrendered , repudiated to
balance his moral ledger: but like the millionaire who could have a
hundred hostlers and handlers but who has just the one horse, the one
maiden, the one moment, the one matching of heart and muscle and will
with the one instant: and himself (the millionaire) patient in the
overalls and the sweat and the stable muck, bringing him along to the
moment when she would say âHe is your father. He cast you and me aside
and denied you his name. Now go' and then sit down and let God finish
it: pistol or knife or rack; destruction or grief or anguish: God to
call the shot or turn the wheel. Jesus, you can almost see him: a little
boy already come to learn, to expect, before he could remember having
learned his own name or the name of the town where he lived or how to
say either of them, that every so often he would be snatched up from
playing and held, gripped between the two hands fierce with (what passed
at least with him for it) love, against the two fierce rigid knees, the
face that he remembered since before remembering began as supervising
all the animal joys of palate and stomach and entrails, of warmth and
pleasure and security, swooping down at him in a kind of blazing
immobility: he taking the interruption as a matter of 238

Page 218

course, as just another natural phenomenon of existence; the face filled
with furious and almost unbearable unforgiving almost like fever (not
bitterness and despair: just implacable will for revenge) as just
another manifestation of mammalian loveiand he not knowing what in hell
it was all about, who would be too young to curry any connected fact out
of the fury and hate and the tumbling speed; not comprehending or
caring: just curious, creating for himself (without help since who to
help him) his own notion of that Porto Rico or Haiti or wherever it was
he understood vaguely that he had come from like orthodox children do of
heaven or the cabbage patch or wherever it was that they came from,
except that his was different in that you were not supposed (your mother
didn't intend to, anyway) to ever go back there (and maybe when you got
as old as she was you would be horrified too every time you found hidden
in your thoughts anything that just smelled or tasted like it might be a
wish to go back there); which you were not supposed to know when and why
you left but only that you had escaped, that whatever power had created
the place for you to hate it had likewise got you away from the place so
you could hate it good and never forgive it in quiet and monotony
(though not exactly in what you would call peace); that you were to
thank God you didn't remember anything about it yet at the same time you
were not to, maybe dared not to, ever forget itihe not even knowing
maybe that he took it for granted that all kids didn't have fathers too
and that getting snatched every day or so from whatever harmless pursuit
in which you were not bothering anybody or even thinking about them, by
someone because that someone was bigger than you, stronger than you, and
being held for a minute or five minutes under a kind of busted water
pipe of incomprehensible fury and fierce yearning and vindictiveness and
jealous rage was a part of childhood which all mothers of children had
received in turn from their mothers and from their mothers in turn from
that Porto Rico or Haiti or wherever it was we all came from but none of
us ever lived in: so that when he grew up and had children he would have
to pass it on too (and maybe deciding then and there that it was too
much trouble and bother and that he would not have any children or at
least hoped he would not) and hence no man had a father, no one personal
Porto Rico or Haiti, but all mother faces which ever bred swooping down
at those almost calculai 239

Page 219

ble moments out of some obscure ancient ble moments out of some obscure
ancient general affronting and outraging which the actual living
articulate meat had not even suffered but merely inherited; all boy
flesh that walked and breathed stemming from that one ambiguous eluded
dark fatherhead and so brothered perennial and ubiquitous everywhere
under the sun ll They stared at one anotheriglared ratheritheir quiet
regular breathing vaporising faintly and steadily in the now tomblike
air. There was something curious in the way they looked at one another,
curious and quiet and profoundly intent, not at all as two young men
might look at each other but almost as a youth and a very young girl
might out of virginity itselfia sort of hushed and naked searching, each
look burdened with youth's immemorial obsession not with time's dragging
weight which the old live with but with its fluidity: the bright heels
of all the lost moments of fifteen and sixteen. "Then he got older and
got out from under the apron despite her (him too maybe; maybe the both
of them) and he didn't even care. He found out that she was up to
something and he not only didn't care, he didn't even care that he
didn't know what it was; got older and found out that she had been
shaping and tempering him to be the instrument for whatever it was her
hand was implacable for, maybe came to believe (or saw) that she had
tricked him into receiving that shape and temper, and didn't care about
that too because probably by that time he had learned that there were
three things and no more: breathing, pleasure, darkness; and without
money there could be no pleasure, and without pleasure it would not even
be breathing but mere protoplasmic inhale and collapse of blind
unorganism in a darkness where light never began. And he had the money
because he knew that she knew that the money was the only thing she
could coerce and smoothe him into the barrier with when Derby Day came
so she didn't dare pinch him there and she knew he knew it: so that
maybe he even blackmailed her, bought her off that way: âYou give me the
jack as I want it and I wont ask why or what for yet.' Or maybe she was
so busy grooming him that she never thought of the money now, who
probably never had had much time to remember it or count it or wonder
how much there was in the intervals of the hating and the being mad, and
so all to check him up about the money would be the lawyer and he (Bon)
probably learned that the first thing: that he could go to 240

Page 220

nil. plus val. crop. Say 1 0 years, one or more children. Intrinsic val.
forced sale house 6 improved land plus liquid assets minus children's
share. Emotional val. ioo% times increase yearly for each child plus
intrinsic val. plus liquid assets plus working acquired credit and maybe
here with the date too: Daughter and you could maybe even have seen the
question mark after it and the other words even: daughter? daughter?
daughter? trailing off not because thinking trailed off, but on the
contrary thinking stopping right still then, backing up a little and
spreading like when you lay a stick across a trickle of water, spreading
and rising slow all around him in whatever place it was that he could
lock the door to and sit quiet and subtract the money that Bon was
spending on his whores and his champagne from what his mother had, and
figure up how much would be left of it tomorrow and next month and next
year or until Sutpen would be good and ripeithinking about the good hard
cash that Bon was throwing 241

Page 221

away on his horses and clothes and the champagne and gambling and women
(he would have known about the octoroon and the left handed marriage
long before the mother did even if it had been any secret; maybe he even
had a spy in the bedroom like he seems to have had in Sutpen's; maybe he
even planted her, said to himself like you do about a dog: He is
beginning to ramble. He needs a block. Not a tether: just a light block
of some sort, so he cant get inside of anything that might have a fence
around it) and only him to try to check it, or as much as he dared, and
not getting far because he knew too that all Bon had to do was to go to
his mother and the racehorse would have a gold eating trough if he
wanted it and, if the jock wasn't careful, a new jockey too scounting up
the money, figuring what he would net at this normal rate over the next
few years, against what it looked like would be left of it to net from
by that time, and meanwhile crucified between his two problems: whether
maybe what he ought to do was to wash his hands of the Sutpen angle and
clean up what was left and light out for Texas: except whenever he
thought about doing that he would have to think about all the money that
Bon had already spent, and that if he had only gone to Texas ten years
ago or five years ago or even last year: so that maybe at night while he
would be waiting for the window to begin to turn gray he would be like
the Aunt Rosa said she was and he would have to deny that he breathed
(or maybe wished he didn't) except for that two hundred percent. times
the intrinsic value every New Year's; the water backing up from the
stick and rising and spreading about him steady and quiet as light and
him sitting there in the actual white glare of clairvoyance (or second
sight or faith in human misfortune and folly or whatever you want to
call it) that was showing him not only what might happen but what was
actually going to happen and him declining to believe it was going to
happen, not because it had come to him as a vision, but because it would
have to have love and honor and courage and pride in it; and believing
it might happen, not because it was logical and possible, but because it
would be the most unfortunate thing for all concerned that could occur;
and though you could no more have proved vice or virtue or courage or
cowardice to him without showing him the moving people than you could
have proved death to him without showing him a corpse, he did believe in
misfortune because of that rigorous z4z

Page 222

and arduous dusty eunuch's training which taught to leave man's good
luck and joys to God, who would in return surrender all his miseries and
follies and misfortunes to the lice and fleas of Coke and Littleton. And
the old Sabine " They starediglarediat one another, their voices (it was
Shreve speaking, though save for the slight difference which the
intervening degrees of latitude had inculcated in them (differences not
in tone or pitch but of turns of phrase and usage of words), it might
have been either of them and was in a sense both: both thinking as one,
the voice which happened to be speaking the thought only the thinking
become audible, vocal; the two of them creating between them, out of the
ragitag and bobiends of old tales and talking, people who perhaps had
never existed at all anywhere, who, shadows, were shadows not of flesh
and blood which had lived and died but shadows in turn of what were (to
one of them at least, to Shreve) shades too) quiet as the visible murmur
of their vaporising breath. The chimes now began to ring for midnight,
melodious slow and faint beyond the closed, the snowisealed, window.
"*the old Sabine, who couldn't to save her life have told you or the
lawyer or Bon or anybody else probably what she wanted, expected, hoped
for because she was a woman and didn't need to want or hope or expect
anything, but just to want and expect and hope (and besides, your father
said that when you have plenty of good strong hating you dont need hope
because the hating will be enough to nourish you); *the old Sabine (not
so old yet, but she would have just let herself go in the sense that you
keep the engines clean and oiled and the best of coal in the bunkers but
you dont bother to shine the brightwork or holystone the decks anymore;
just let herself go on the outside. Not fat; she would burn it up too
fast for that, shrivel it away in the gullet between swallowing and
stomach; no pleasure in the chewing; having to chew just another
nuisance like no pleasure in the clothing; having the old wear out and
having to choose the new just another nuisance: and no pleasure in the
fine figure hes" neither of them said âBon' "*cut in the fine pants that
fit his leg and the fine coats that fit his shoulders nor in the fact
that he had more watches and cuff buttons and finer linen and horses and
yellowiwheeled buggies (not to mention the gals) than most others did,
but all that too just an unavoidable nuisance 243

Page 223

that he would have to get shut of before he could do her any good just
like he had to get shut of the teething and the chicken pox and the
light boy's bones in order to be able to do her any good)*the old Sabine
getting the faked reports from the lawyer like reports sent back to
headquarters from a battle front, with maybe a special nigger in the
lawyer's anteroom to do nothing else but carry them and that maybe once
in two years or five times in two days, depending on when she would
begin to itch for news and began to worry himithe report, the communique
about how we are not far behind him in Texas Or Missouri or maybe
California (California would be fine, that far away; convenient, proof
inherent in the sheer distance, the necessity to accept and believe) and
we are going to catch up with him any day now and so do not worry. So
she wouldn't, she wouldn't worry at all: she would just have out the
carriage and go to the lawyer, busting in in the black dress that looked
like a section of limp stove pipe and maybe not even a hat but just a
shawl over her head, so that the only things missing would be the mop
and the pailibusting in and saying âHe's dead. I know he is dead and how
can he, how can he be', not meaning what the Aunt Rosa meant: where did
they find or invent a bullet that could kill him but How can hebe
allowed to die without having to admit that he was wrong and suffer and
regret it and so in the next two seconds they would almost catch him
(heithe lawyeriwould show her the actual letter, the writing in the
English she couldn't read, that had just come in, that he had just sent
for the nigger to carry to her when she came in, and the lawyer done
practised putting the necessary date on the letter until he could do it
now while his back would be toward her, in the two seconds it would take
him to get the letter out of the file)*catch him, get so close to him as
to have ample satisfaction that he was alive; so close indeed that he
would be able to get her out of the office before she had sat down and
into the carriage again and on the way home again where, among the
Florentine mirrors and Paris drapes and tufted camisoles, she would
still look like the one that had come in to scrub the floors, in the
black dress that the cook wouldn't have looked at even when it was new
five or six years ago, holding, clutching the letter she couldn't read
(maybe the only word in it she could even recognise would be the word
âSutpen') in one hand and brushing back a rope of lank ironicolored hair
with the other 244

Page 224

since before he could remember he now realised had been plowing and
planting and watering and manuring and harvesting him as if he already
was):*him watching her, lounging there against the mantel maybe in the
fine clothes, in the harem incense odor of what you might call easy
sanctity, watching her looking at the letter, not even thinking I am
looking upon my mother naked since if the hating was nakedness, she had
worn it long enough now for it to do the office of clothing like they
say that modesty can do, does 245

Page 225

that the lawyer was up to something, and that it would be all right with
the lawyer if his mother got whatever it was she wanted, provided he
(the lawyer) got what he wanted one second before or at least at the
same time. He went away to school; he said 'All right' and told the
octoroon goodbye and went to school, who not in all the twentyieight
years had ever been told by anyone, 'Do as these others do; have this
task done at nine a.m. tomorrow or Friday or Monday'; maybe it was even
the octoroon whom they (or the lawyer) usedithe light block (not tether)
which the lawyer had put on him to keep him from getting inside of
something which might be found to have a fence around it later. Maybe
the mother found out about the octoroon and the child and the ceremony
and discovered more than the lawyer had (or would believe, who
considered Bon only dull, not a fool) and sent for him and he came and
lounged against the mantel again and maybe knowing what was up, what had
happened before she told him, lounging there with an expression on his
face you might call smiling except it was not that but just something
you couldn't see through or past, and she watching him with maybe the
lank ironicolored strand of hair down again and not even bothering to
brush it back now because she was not looking at any letter now but her
eyes blazing at him, her voice trying to blaze at him out of the urgency
of alarm and fear, but she managing to keep it down since she could not
talk about betrayal because she had not told him yet, and now, at this
moment, she would not dare risk it; *he looking at her from behind the
smiling that wasn't smiling but was just something you were not supposed
to see beyond, saying, admitting it: 'Why not? All young men do it. The
ceremony too. I didn't set out to get the child, but now that I have....
lt's not a bad child, either' and she watching him, glaring at him and
not being able to say what she would because she had put off too long
now saying what she could: 246

Page 226

âBut you. This is different' and he (she would not need to say it. He
would know because he already knew why she had sent for him, even if he
did not know and did not care what she had been up to since before he
could remember, since before he could take a woman whether in love or
not): âWhy not? Men seem to have to marry some day, sooner or later. And
this is one whom I know, who makes me no trouble. And with the ceremony,
that bother, already done. And as for a little matter like a spot of
negro bloodi' not needing to talk much, say much either, not needing to
say I seem to have been born into this world with so few fathers that I
have too many brothers to outrage and shame while alive and hence too
many descendants to bequeath my little portion 0 f hurt and harm to,
dead; not that, just âa little spot of negro blood*' and then to watch
the face, the desperate urgency and fear, then to depart, kissing her
maybe, her hand maybe which would lie in his and even touch his lips
like a dead hand because of the desperate casting for this straw or
that; maybe as he went out he said she will go to him (the lawyer); i f
I were to wait five minutes I could see her in the shawl. So probably by
tonight I will be able to knowiif I cared to know. Maybe by night he
did, maybe before that if they managed to find him, get word to him,
because she went to the lawyer. And it was right in the lawyer's alley.
Maybe before she even got started telling it good that gentle white glow
began like when you turn up a wick; maybe he could even almost see his
hand writing on into the space where the daughter? daughter? daughter?
never had quite showed. Because maybe that had been the lawyer's trouble
and worry and concern all the time; that ever since she had made him
promise he would never tell Bon who his father was, he had been waiting
and wondering how to do it, since maybe he knew that if he were to tell
Bon, Bon might believe it or he might not, but certainly he would go and
tell his mother that the lawyer had told him and then he (the lawyer)
would be sunk, not for any harm done because there would be no harm,
since this could not alter the situation, but for having crossed his
paranoiac client. Maybe while he would sit in his office adding and
subtracting the money and adding what they would get out of Sutpen (he
was never worried about what Bon would do when he found out; he had
probably a long time ago paid Bon that compliment of thinking that even
if he was too dull or too indolent to suspect or find out about 247

Page 227

his father himself, he wasn't fool enough not to be able to take
advantage of it once somebody showed him the proper move; maybe if the
thought had ever occurred to him that because of love or honor or
anything else under heaven or jurisprudence either, Bon would not, would
refuse to, he (the lawyer) would even have furnished proof that he no
longer breathed)*maybe all the time it was this that racked him: how to
get Bon where he would either have to find it out himself, or where
somebody *the father or the motheriwould have to tell him. So maybe she
wasn't out of the office goodior at least as soon as he had had time to
open the safe and look in the secret drawer and make sure that it was
the University of Mississippi that Henry attendedibefore his hand was
writing steady and even into the space where the daughter? daughter?
daughter? never had showediand with the date here too: 1859. Two
children. Say i860, 20 years. Increase 20070 times intrinsic val. yearly
plus liquid assets plus credit earned. Approx te val. 1866, 1 00,000.
Query: bigamy threat, Yes or No. Possible No. Incest threat: Credible
Yes and the hand going back before it put down the period, lining out
the Credible, writing in Certain, underlining it. "And he didn't care
about that too; he just said, âAll right.â Because maybe he knew now
that his mother didn't know and never would know what she wanted, and so
he couldn't beat her (maybe he had learned from the octoroon that you
cant beat women anyhow and that if you are wise or dislike trouble and
uproar you dont even try to), and he knew that all the lawyer wanted was
just the money; and so if he just didn't make the mistake of believing
that he could beat all of it, if he just remembered to be quiet and be
alert he could beat some of it.* So he said, âAll right' and let his
mother pack the fine clothes and the fine linen into the bags and
trunks, and maybe he lounged into the lawyer's office and watched from
behind that something which could have been called smiling while the
lawyer made the elbow motion about getting his horses onto the steamboat
and maybe buying him an extra special body servant and arranging about
the money and all; watching from behind the smiling while the lawyer did
the heavy father even, talking about the scholarship, the culture, the
Latin and the Greek that would equip and polish him for the position
which he would hold in life and how a man to be sure could get that
anywhere, in his own library even, who had the 248

Page 228

will; but how there was something, some quality to culture which only
the monastic, the cloistral monotony of assay obscure and small (though
high class, high class) college; and hes" (neither of them said 'Bon'.
Never at any time did there seem to be any confusion between them as to
whom Shreve meant by 'he') "*listening courteous and quiet behind that
expression which you were not supposed to see past, asking at last,
interrupting maybe, courteous and affablei nothing of irony, nothing of
sarcasmi'What did you say this college was?': and now a good deal of
elbow motion here while the lawyer would shuffle through the papers to
find the one from which he could read that name which he had been

memorising ever since he first talked to the mother: 'The University of
Mississippi, at' Where did you say?" "Oxford," Quentin said. "It's about
forty miles from "*âOxford.' And then the papers could be still again

because he would be talking: about a small college only ten years old,
about how there wouldn't be anything to distract him from his studies
there (where, in a sense, wisdom herself would be a virgin or at least
not very second hand) and how he would have a chance to observe another
and a provincial section of the country in which his high destiny
(granted the outcome of this war which was without doubt imminent, the
successful conclusion of which we all hoped for, had no doubt of) as the
man he would be and the economic power he would represent when his
mother passed on, was rooted; and he listening behind that expression,
saying, 'Then you dont recommend the law as a vocation?â and now for
just a moment the lawyer would stop, but not long; maybe not long enough
or perceptible enough for you to call it pause: and he would be looking
at Bon too: 'It hadn't occurred to me that the law might appeal to you'
and Bon: 'Neither did practising with a rapier appeal to me while I was
doing it. But I can recall at least one occasion in my life when I was
glad I had' and then the lawyer, smooth and easy: 'Then by all means let
it be the law. Your mother will agibe pleased.â 'All right,â he said,
not 'goodbye'; he didn't care; maybe not even goodbye to the octoroon,
to those tears and lamentations and maybe even the clinging, the soft
despairing magnoliaicolored arms about his knees, and (say) three and a
half feet above that boneless steel gyves that expression which was not
smiling but just something not to be seen through. Because you cant 249

Page 229

beat them: you just flee (and thank God you can flee, can escape from
that massy fiveifootithick maggoticheesy solidarity which overlays the
earth, in which men and women in couples are ranked and racked like
ninepins; thanks to whatever Gods for that masculine hipless tapering
peg which fits light and glib to move where the cartridgeichambered hips
of women hold them fast); not goodbye: all right: and one night he
walked up the gangplank between the torches and probably only the lawyer
there to see him off and this not for godspeed but to make sure that he
actually took the boat. And the new extra nigger opening the bags in the
stateroom, spreading the fine clothes, and the ladies already gathered
in the saloon for supper and the men in the bar, preparing for it but
not he; he alone, at the rail, with a cigar maybe, watching the city
drift and wink and glitter and sink away and then all motion cease, the
boat suspended immobile and without progress from the stars themselves
by the two ropes of sparkifilled smoke streaming upward from the stacks.
And who knows what thinking, what sober weighing and discarding , who
had known for years that his mother was up to something even though he
did not (probably believed he never would) know what; that the lawyer
was up to something and though he knew that was just money, yet he knew
that within his (the lawyer's) known masculine limitations he (the
lawyer) could be almost as dangerous as the unknown quantity which was
his mother; and now thisischool, collegeiand he twentyieight years old.
And not only that, but this particular college, which he had never heard
of, which ten years ago did not even exist; and knowing too that it was
the lawyer who had chosen it for himiwhat sober, what intent, what
almost frowning Why? Why? Why this college, this particular one above
all others? maybe leaning there in that solitude between panting smoke
and engines and almost touching the answer, aware of the jigsaw puzzle
picture integers of it waiting, almost lurking, just beyond his reach,
inextricable, jumbled, and unrecognisable yet on the point of falling
into pattern which would reveal to him at once, like a flash of light,
the meaning of his whole life, pastithe Haiti, the childhood, the
lawyer, the woman who was his mother. And maybe the letter itself right
there under his feet, somewhere in the darkness beneath the deck on
which he stoodithe letter addressed not to Thomas Sutpen at Sutpen's
Hundred but to Henry Sutpen, Esquire, in 2 So

Page 230

the very affinity and instinct for misfortune of a man who had spent
that much time in a monastery even, let alone one who had lived that
many years as you lived them, tell you better than that? didn't the
dread and fear of females which you must have drawn in with the primary
mammalian milk teach you better? What kind of abysmal and purblind
innocence could that have been which someone told you to call virginity?
what conscience to trade with which would have warranted you in the
belief that you could have bought immunity from her for no other coin
but justice?â " It was at this point that Shreve went to the bedroom and
put on the bathrobe. He did not say Wait, he just rose and left Quentin
sitting before the table, the open book and the letter, and went out and
returned in the robe and sat again and took up the cold pipe, though
without filling it anew or lighting it as it was. "All right," he said.
"So that Christmas Henry brought him home, into the house, and the demon
looked up and saw the face he believed he had paid off and discharged
twentyieight years ago. Go on." "Yes," Quentin said. "Father said he
probably named him himself. Charles Bon. Charles Good. He didn't tell
Grandfather that he did, but Grandfather believed he did, would ..ERR,
COD:l.. shortly thereafter be a petitioner beforc the same Bar of
knowledge and wisdom as yourself. It is in his behalf that I write. No:
1 will not say behalf; certainly 1 shall not let his lady mother nor the
young gentleman

Page 231

air of indolent and lethal assurance that only the most reckless man
would have gratuitously drawn the comparison (and with no attempt to
teach, train, play the mentor on his partiand then maybe yes; maybe who
could know what times he looked at Henry's face and thought, not there
but for the intervening leaven of that blood which we do not have in
common is my skull, my brow, sockets, shape and angle of jaw and chin
and some of my thinking behind it, and which he could see in my face in
his turn if he but knew to look as I know but there, just behind a
little, obscured a little by that alien blood whose admixing was
necessary in order that he exist is the face of the man who shaped us
both out of that blind chancy darkness which we call the future;
thereithereiat any moment, second, I shall penetrate by something 0 f
will and intensity and dreadful need, and strip that alien leavening
from it and look not on my brother's face whom I did not know I
possessed and hence never missed, but my father's, out of the shadow of
whose absence my spirit's posthumeity has never escaped;*at what moment
thinking, watching the eagerness which was without abjectness, the
humility which surrendered no prideithe entire proffering of the spirit
of which the unconscious aping of clothes and speech and mannerisms was
but the shellithinking what cannot I do with this willing flesh and bone
if I wish; this flesh and bone and spirit which stemmed from the same
source that mine did, but which sprang in quiet peace and contentment
and ran in steady even though monotonous sunlight, where that which he
bequeathed me sprang in hatred and outrage and unforgiving and ran in
shadowiwhat could I not mold o f this malleable and eager clay which
that father himself could notito what shape of what good there might,
must, be in that blood and none handy to take and mold that portion 0 f
it in me until too late: or what moments when he might have told himself
that it was nonsense, it could not be true; that such coincidences only
happened in books, thinkingithe weariness, the fatalism, the
incorrigible cat for solitudeiThat young clodhopper bastard. How shall I
get rid o f him: and then the voice, the other voice: You dont mean
that: and he: No. But I do mean the clodhopper bastard) and the days,
the afternoons, while they rode together (and Henry aping him here too,
who was the better horseman, who maybe had nothing of what Bon would
have called style but who had done more of it, to whom a horse was as
natural as walking, 254

Page 232

who would ride anything anywhere and at anything) while he must have
watched himself being swamped and submerged in the bright unreal flood
of Henry's speech, translated (the three of them: himself and Henry and
the sister whom he had never seen and perhaps did not even have any
curiosity to see) into a world like a fairy tale in which nothing else
save them existed, riding beside Henry, listening, needing to ask no
questions, to prompt to further speech in any manner that youth who did
not even suspect that he and the man beside him might be brothers, who
each time his breath crossed his vocal cords was saying From now on mine
and my sister's house will be your house and mine and my sister's lives
your life, wondering (Bon)*or maybe not wondering at allihow if
conditions were reversed and Henry was the stranger and he (Bon) the
scion and still knew what he suspected, if he would say the same; then
(Bon) agreeing at last, saying at last, âAll right. I'll come home with
you for Christmas', not to see the third inhabitant of Henry's fairy
tale, not to see the sister because he had not once thought of her: he
had merely listened about her: but thinking So at last I shall see him,
whom it seems I was bred up never to expect to see, whom I had even
learned to live without, thinking maybe how he would walk into the house
and see the man who made him and then he would know; there would be that
flash, that instant of indisputable recognition between them and he
would know for sure and foreverithinking maybe That's all I want. He
need not even acknowledge me; I will let him understand just as quickly
that he need not do that, that I do not expect that, will not be hurt by
that, just as he will let me know that quickly that I am his son,
thinking maybe, maybe again with that expression you might call smiling
but which was not, which was just something that even just a clodhopper
bastard was not intended to see beyond: I am my mother's son, at least:
I do not seem to know what I want either. Because he knew exactly what
he wanted; it was just the saying of itithe physical touch even though
in secret, hiddenithe living touch of that flesh warmed before he was
born by the same blood which it had bequeathed him to warm his own flesh
with, to be bequeathed by him in turn to run hot and loud in veins and
limbs after that first flesh and then his own were dead. So the
Christmas came and he and Henry rode the forty miles to Sutpen's
Hundred, with Henry still talking, still keeping distended and light and
iridescent with 255

Page 233

woman and a pauper, I turned naturally not for protection but for actual
food to my only kin: my dead sister's family: though I defy anyone to
blame me, an orphan of twenty, a young woman without resources, who
should desire not only to justify her situation but to vindicate the
honor of a family the good name of whose women has never been impugned,
by accepting the honorable proffer of marriage from the man whose food
she was forced to subsist on. And most of all, I do not plead myself: a
young woman emerging from a holocaust which had taken parents security
and all from her, who had seen all that living meant to her fall into
ruins about the feet of a few figures with the shapes of men but with
the names and statures of heroes; 7a young woman I say thrown into daily
and hourly contact with one of these men who, despite what he might have
been at one time and despite what she might have believed or even known
about him, had fought for four honorable years for the soil and
traditions of the land where she had been born (and the man who had done
that, villain dyed though he be, would have possessed in her eyes, even
if only from association with them, the stature and shape of a hero too)
and now he also emerging from the same holocaust in which she had
suffered, with nothing to face what the future held for the South but
his bare hands and the sword which he at least had never surrendered and
the citation for valor from his defeated Commanderiini Chief. Oh he was
brave. I have never gainsaid that. But that our cause, our very life and
future hopes and past pride, should have been thrown into the balance
with men like that to buttress itimen with valor and strength but her
until he disappeared , taking Henry with him, and she never saw him
again and war and trouble and grief and bad food filled her days until
maybe she didn't even remember after a while that she had ever forgot
him. (And the girl, the sister, the virginiJesus, who to know what she
saw that afternoon when they rode up the drive, what prayer, what maiden
meditative dream ridden up out of whatever fabulous land, not in harsh
stove iron but the silken and tragic Launcelot nearing thirty, ten years
older than she was and wearied, sated with what experiences and
pleasures, which Henry's letters must have created for her.) And the day
came to depart and no sign yet; he and Henry rode away and still no
sign, no more sign at parting than when he had seen it first, in that
face where he might (he would believe) have seen for himself the truth
and so would have needed no sign, if it hadn't been for the beard; no
sign in the eyes which 256

Page 234

if he could not have understood why, thinking in the middle of this My
God, I am young, young, and l didn't even know it; they didn't even tell
me, that l was young, feeling that same despair and shame like when you
have to watch your father fail in physical courage, thinking It should
have been me that failed; me, I, not he who stemmed from that blood
which we both bear before it could have become corrupt and tainted by
whatever it was in Mother's that he could not brook.7Wait," Shreve
cried, though Quentin had not spoken: it had been merely some quality,
some gathering of Quentin's still lazed and hunched figure which
presaged speech, because Shreve said Wait. Wait. before Quentin could
have begun to speak. "Because he hadn't even looked at her. Oh, he had
seen her all right, he had had plenty of opportunity for that; he could
not have helped but that because Mrs Sutpen would have seen to its ten
days of that kind of planned and arranged and executed privacies like
the campaigns of dead generals in the text books, in libraries and
parlors and drives in the buggy in the afternoonsiall planned three
months ago when Mrs Sutpen read Henry's first letter with Bon's name in
it, until maybe even Judith too began to feel like the other one to a
pair of goldfish: and him even talking to her too, or what talking he
could have found to do to a country girl who probably never saw a man
young or old before who sooner or later didn't smell like manure;
talking to her about like he would talk to the old dame on the gold
chairs in the parlor, except that in the one case he would have to make
all the conversation and in the other he would not even be able to make
his own escape but would have to wait for Henry to come and get him. And
maybe he had even thought about her by that time; maybe at the times
when he would 257

Page 235

be telling himself it cant be so; he could not look at me like this
every day and make no sign if it were so he would even tell himself She
would be easy like when you have left the champagne on the supper table
and are walking toward the whiskey on the sideboard and you happen to
pass a cup of lemon sherbet on a tray and you look at the sherbet and
tell yourself, That would be easy too only who wants it. Does that suit
you?" "But it's not love," Quentin said. "Because why not? Because
listen. What was it the old dame, the Aunt Rosa, told you about how
there are some things that just have to be whether they are or not, have
to be a damn sight more than some other things that maybe are and it
dont matter a damn whether they are or not? That was it. He just didn't
have time yet. Jesus, he must have known it would be. Like that lawyer
thought, he wasn't a fool; the trouble was, he wasn't the kind of
notifool the lawyer thought he would be. He must have known it was going
to happen. It would be like you passed that sherbet and maybe you knew
you would even reach the sideboard and the whiskey, yet you knew that
tomorrow morning you would want that sherbet, then you reached the
whiskey and you knew you wanted that sherbet now; maybe you didn't even
go to the sideboard , maybe you even looked back at that champagne on
the supper table among the dirty haviland and the crumpled damask, and
all of a sudden you knew you didn't want to go back there even. It would
be no question of choosing, having to choose between the champagne or
whiskey and the sherbet, but all of a sudden (it would be spring then,
in that country where he had never spent a spring before and you said
North Mississippi is a little harder country than Louisiana, with
dogwood and violets and the early scentless flowers but the earth and
the nights still a little cold and the hard tight sticky buds like young
girls' nipples on alder and Judas trees and beech and maple and even
something young in the cedars like he never saw before) you find that
you dont want anything but that sherbet and that you haven't been
wanting anything else but that and you have been wanting that pretty
hard for some timeibesides knowing that that sherbet is there for you to
take. Not just for anybody to take but for you to take, knowing just
from looking at that cup that it would be like a flower that, if any
other hand 258

Page 236

reached for it, it would have thorns on it but not for your hand; and
him not used to that since all the other cups that had been willing and
easy for him to take up hadn't contained sherbet but champagne or at
least kitchen wine. And more than that. There was the knowing what he
suspected might be so, or not knowing if it was so or not. And who to
say if it wasn't maybe the possibility of incest, because who (without a
sister: I dont know about the others) has been in love and not
discovered the vain evanescence of the fleshly encounter; who has not
had to realise that when the brief all is done you must retreat from
both love and pleasure, gather up your own rubbish and refuseithe hats
and pants and shoes which you drag through the worldiand retreat since
the gods condone and practise these and the dreamy immeasurable coupling
which floats oblivious above the trammelling and harried instant, the:
wasinot: is: was: is a perquisite only of balloony and weightless
elephants and whales: but maybe if there were sin too maybe you would
not be permitted to escape, uncouple, return.7Aint that right?" He
ceased; he could have been interrupted easily now. Quentin could have
spoken now, but Quentin did not. He just sat as before, his hands in his
trousers pockets, his shoulders hugged inward and hunched, his face
lowered and he looking somehow curiously smaller than he actually was
because of his actual height and sparenessithat quality of delicacy
about the bones, articulation, which even at twenty still had something
about it, some last echo about it, of adolescenceithat is, as compared
with the cherubic burliness of the other who faced him, who looked
younger, whose very superiority in bulk and displacement made him look
even younger, as a plump boy of twelve who outweighs the other by twenty
or thirty pounds still looks younger than the boy of fourteen who had
that plumpness once and lost it, sold it (whether with his consent or
not) for that state of virginity which is neither boy's nor girl's. "I
dont know," Quentin said. "All right," Shreve said. "Maybe I dont
either. Only, Jesus, some day you are bound to fall in love. They just
wouldn't beat you that way. It would be like if God had got Jesus born
and saw that He had the carpenter tools and then never gave Him anything
to build with them. Dont you believe that?" "I dont know," Quentin said.
He did not move. Shreve looked at him. 259

Page 237

young girl, a virgin; I am hearing about a narrow delicate fenced virgin
field already furrowed and bedded so that all I shall need to do is drop
the seeds in, caress it smooth again, saw her that Christmas and knew it
for certain and then forgot it, went back to school and did not even
remember that he had forgotten it, because he did not have time then;
maybe it was just one day in that spring you told about when he stopped
and said, right quiet: All right. I want to go to bed with who might be
my sister. All right and then forgot that too. Because he didn't have
time. That is, he didn't have anything else but time, because he had to
wait. But not for her. That was all fixed. It was the other. Maybe he
thought it would be in the mail bag each time the nigger rode over from
Sutpen's Hundred and Henry believing it was the letter from her that he
was waiting for when what he was thinking was Maybe he will write it
then. He would just have to write 'I am your father. Burn this' and I
would do it. Or if not that, a sheet a scrap of paper with the one word
'Charles' in his hand, and I would know what he meant and he would not
even have to ask me to burn it. Or a lock of his hair or a paring from
his finger nail and I would know them because I believe now that I have
known what his hair and his finger nails would look like all my life,
could choose that lock and that paring out o f a thousand. And it did
not come, and his letter went to her every two weeks and hers came back
to him, and maybe he thought I f one o f mine to her should come back to
me unopened then. That would be a sign. And that didn't happen: and then
Henry began to talk about his stopping at Sutpen's Hundred for a day or
so on his way home and he said all right to it, said It will be Henry
who will get the letter, the letter saying it is inconvenient for me to
come at that time; so apparently he does not intend to acknowledge me as
his son, but at least I shall have forced him to admit that I am. And
that one did not come either and the date was set and the family at
Sutpen's Hundred notified of it and that letter did not come either and
he thought It will be then; ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 238

be June now, with the magnolias and mockingbirds in the moonlight and
the curtains blowing in the June air of commencement and the music,
fiddles and triangles, inside among the swirling and dipping hoops: and
Henry would be a little tight, that should have been saying 'I demand to
know your intentions toward my sister' but wasn't saying it, instead
maybe blushing again even in the moonlight, but standing straight and
blushing because when you are proud enough to be humble you dont have to
cringe (who every time he breathed over his vocal cords he was saying We
belong to you; do as you will with us), saying 'I used to think that I
would hate the man that I would have to look at every day and whose
every move and action and speech would say to me, I have seen and
touched parts of your sister's body that you will never see and touch:
and now I know that I shall hate him and that's why I want that man to
be you', knowing that Bon would know what he meant, was 26z

Page 239

trying to say, tell him, thinking, telling himself (Henry): Not just
because he is older than I am and has known more than I shall ever know
and has remembered more 0 f it; but because 0 f my own free will, and
whether I knew it at the time or not does not matter, I gave my life and
Judith's both to him "That's still not love," Quentin said. "All right,"
Shreve said. "Just listen. Rode the forty miles and into the gates and
up to the house. And this time Sutpen wasn't even there. And Ellen
didn't even know where he had gone, believing blandly and volubly that
he had gone to Memphis or maybe even to Saint Louis on business, and
Henry and Judith not even caring that much, and only he, Bon, to know
where Sutpen had gone, saying to himself Of course; he wasn't sure; he
had to go there to make sure, telling himself that loud now, loud and
fast too so he would not, could not, hear the thinking, the But i f he
suspected, why not have told me? I would have done that, gone to him
first, who have the blood after it was tainted and corrupt by whatever
it was in Mother; loud and fast now, telling himself That's what it is;
maybe he has gone on ahead to wait for me; he left no message for me
here because the others are not to suspect yet and he knows that I will
know at once where he is when I find him gone, thinking of the two of
them, the sombre vengeful woman who was his mother and the grim rocklike
man who had looked at him every day for ten days with absolutely no
alteration of expression at all, facing one another in grim armistice
after almost thirty years in that rich baroque drawing room in that
house which he called home since apparently everybody seemed to have to
have a home, the man who he was now sure was his father not humble now
either (and he, Bon, proud of that), not saying even now I was wrong but
I admit that it is soi Jesus, think of his heart then, during those two
days, with the old gal throwing Judith at him every minute now because
she had been spreading the news of the engagement confidentially through
the county ever since Christmasididn't your father say how she had even
taken Judith to Memphis in the spring to buy the trousseau?7and Judith
neither having to accede to the throwing nor to resist it but just
being, just existing and breathing like Henry did who maybe one morning
during that spring waked up and lay right still in the bed and took
stock, added the figures and drew the 263

Page 240

difference to her. She would have acted as Sutpen would have acted with
anyone who tried to cross him: she would have taken Bon anyway. I can
imagine her if necessary even murdering the other woman. But she
certainly would have made no investigation and then held a moral debate
between what she wanted and what she thought was right. Yet she waited.
She waited four years, with no word from him save through Henry that he
(Bon) was alive, because Henry would not let Bon write her. He would not
have. And Bon would not have tried to. It was the probation, the
durance; they all three accepted it; I dont believe there was ever any
promise between Henry and Bon demanded or offered. But Judith, who could
not have known what happened nor why.*Have you noticed how so often when
we try to reconstruct the causes which lead up to the actions of men and
women, how with a sort of astonishment we find ourselves now and then
reduced to the belief, the only possible belief, that they stemmed from
some of the old virtues? the thief who steals not for greed but for
love, the murderer who kills not out of lust but pity? Judith, giving
implicit trust where she had given love, giving implicit love where she
had derived breath and pride: that true pride, not that false kind which
transforms what it does not at the moment understand into scorn and
outrage and so vents itself in pique and lacerations, but true pride
which can say to itself without abasement I love, I will accept no
substitute; something has happened between him and my father; i f my
father was right, I will never see him again, i f wrong he will come or
send for me; if happy I can be I will, if suffer I must I to do anything
that I consider dishonorable : so that (maybe he even kissed her that
time, the first time she had ever been kissed maybe and she too innocent
to be coy or modest or even to know that she had been temporised with,
maybe afterward just looking at him with a kind of peaceful and blank
surprise at the fact that your sweetheart apparently kissed you the
first time like your brother wouldiprovided of course that your brother
ever thought of, could be brought to, kissing you on the mouth)*so that
when the two days were up and he was gone again and Ellen shrieking at
her, âWhat? No engagement, no troth, no ring?' she would be too
astonished even to lie about it because that would be the first time it
would have occurred to her that there had been no proposal.7Think of his
heart then, while he rode to the River, and then on the steamboat itself
where he walked up and down the deck, feeling through the deck the
engines driving him nearer and nearer day and night to the moment which
he must have realised now he had been waiting for ever since he had got
big enough to comprehend. Of course every now and then he would have to
say it pretty fast and loud, That's all it is. He just wants to make
sure first to drown out the old But why do it this way. Why not back
there? He knows that I shall never make any claim upon any part of what
he now possesses, gained at the price 0 f what sacrifice and endurance
and scorn (so they told me; not he: they) only he knows; knows that so
well that it would never have occurred to him just as he knows it would
never occur to me that this might be his reason, who is not only
generous but ruthless, who must have surrendered everything he and
Mother owned to her and to me as the price 0 f repudiating her, not

because the doing it this way hurt him, flouted him and kept him in
suspense that much unnecessary longer, because he didn't matter; whether
he was irked or even crucified didn't matter: it was the fact that he
had to be kept constantly reminded that he would not have done it this
way himself, yet he had stemmed from 264

Page 241

belongs to you but maybe he did write to Judith now, by the first nigger
post which rode to Sutpen's Hundred, about how it had been an uneventful
summer and hence nothing to write about, with maybe Charles Bon plain
and inelidible on the outside of the envelope and he thinking He will
have to see that. Maybe he will send it back thinking Maybe i f it comes
back nothing will stop me then and so maybe at last I will know what I
am going to do. But it didn't come back. And the others didn't come
back. And the fall passed and Christmas came and they rode again to
Sutpen's Hundred and this time he was not there again, he was in the
field, he had gone to town, he was huntingisomething; Sutpen not there
when they rode up and Bon knew he had not expected him to be there,
saying Now. Now. Now. It will come now. It will come this time, and I am
young, young, because I still dont know what I am going to do. So maybe
what he was doing that twilight (because he knew that Sutpen had
returned, was now in the house; it would be like a wind, something, dark
and chill, breathing upon him and he stopping, grave, quiet, alert,
thinking What? What is it? Then he would know; he could feel the other
entering the house, and he would let his held breath go quiet and easy,
a profound exhalation, his heart quiet too) in the garden while he
walked with Judith and talked to her, gallant and elegant and automatic
(and Judith thinking about that like she thought about that first kiss
back in the summer: So that's it. That's what love is, bludgeoned once
more by disappointment but still unbowed); maybe what he was doing there
now was waiting, telling himself Maybe even yet he will send for me. At
least say it to me even though he knew better: He is in the library now,
he has sent the nigger for Henry, now Henry is entering the room: so
that maybe he stopped and faced her, with something in his face that was
smiling now, and took her by the elbows and turned her, easy and gentle,
until she faced the house, and said âGo. I wish to be alone to think
about love' and she went just as she took the kiss that day, with maybe
the feel of the flat of his hand light and momentary upon her behind.
And he stood there facing the house until Henry came out, and they
looked at one another for a while with no word said and then turned and
walked together through the garden, across the lot and into the stable,
where maybe there was a nigger there and maybe they saddled the two
horses themselves and waited until the house nigger came with 266

Page 242

that which, so Shreve and Quentin believed, would be like death for him
to learn. So it was four of them still who got off the boat in New
Orleans, which Henry had never seen before (whose entire cosmopolitan
experience , apart from his sojourn at the school, consisted probably of
one or two trips to Memphis with his father to buy live stock or slaves)
and had no time to look at nowiHenry who knew yet did not believe, and
Bon whom Mr Compson had called a fatalist but who, according to Shreve
and Quentin, did not resist Henry's dictum and design for the reason
that he neither knew nor cared what Henry intended to do because he had
long since realised that he did not know yet what he himself was going
to do; four of them who sat in that drawing room of baroque and fusty
magnificence which Shreve had invented and which was probably true
enough, while the Haitiiborn daughter of the French sugar planter and
the woman who Sutpen's first fatheriinilaw had told him was a Spaniard
(the slight dowdy woman with untidy grayistreaked raven hair coarse as a
horse's tail, with parchmenticolored skin and implacable pouched black
eyes which alone showed no age because they showed no forgetting, whom
Shreve and Quentin had likewise invented and which was likewise probably
true enough) told them nothing because she did not need to because she
had already told it, who did not say, âMy son is in love with your
sister?â but â80 she has fallen in love with him' and then sat laughing
harshly and steadily at Henry who could not have lied to her even if he
would have, who did not even have to answer at all either Yes or
No.7Four of them there, in that room in New Orleans in 1860, just as in
a sense there were four of them here in this tomblike room in
Massachusetts in igio. And Bon may have, probably did, take Henry to
call on the octoroon mistress and the child, as Mr Compson said, though
neither Shreve nor Quentin believed that the visit affected Henry as Mr
Compson seemed to think. In fact, Quentin did not even tell Shreve what
his father had said about the visit. Perhaps Quentin himself had not
been listening when Mr Compson related (recreated?) it that evening at
home; perhaps at that moment on the gallery in the hot September
twilight Quentin took that in stride without even hearing it just as
Shreve would have, since both he and Shreve believediand were probably
right in this tooithat the octoroon and the child would have been to
Henry only something else 268

Page 243

about Bon to be, not envied but aped if that had been possible, if there
had been time and peace to ape it inipeace not between men of the same
race and nation but peace between two young embattled spirits and the
incontrovertible fact which embattled them, since neither Henry and Bon,
anymore than Quentin and Shreve, were the first young men to believe (or
at least apparently act on the assumption) that wars were sometimes
created for so now it would be short, this time with the lawyer, the
shortest one of all. Because the lawyer would have been watching him;
maybe there had even been a letter during that second fall while the
lawyer was waiting and still nothing seemed to be happening up there
(and maybe the lawyer was the reason why Bon never answered Henry's and
Judith's letters during that summer: because he never got them)*a
letter, two or maybe three pages of your humble and obedient e and t and
c that boiled down to eighteen words 1 know you are a fool, but just
what kind 0 f a fool are you going to be? and Bon was at least enough of
a notifool to do the boiling down.7Yes, watching him, not concerned yet,
just considerably annoyed, giving Bon plenty of time to come to him,
giving him all of a week maybe (after heithe lawyeriwould have contrived
to get hold of Henry and find out a good deal of what Henry was thinking
without Henry ever knowing it) before he would contrive Bon too, and
maybe so good at the contriving that even Bon would not know at once
what was coming. It would be a short one. It would be no secret between
them now; it would just be unsaid: the lawyer behind the desk (and maybe
in the secret drawer the ledger where he had just finished adding in the
last past year's interest compounded between the intrinsic and the love
and pride at two hundred percent.)*the lawyer fretted, annoyed, but not
at all concerned since he not only knew he had the screws, but he still
did not really believe that Bon was that kind of a fool, though he was
about to alter his opinion somewhat about the dullness, or at least the
backwardness; the lawyer watching him and saying, smooth and oily, since
it would be no secret now, who would know now that Bon knew all he would
ever know or ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 244

the coup: 'Do you know that you are a very fortunate young man? With
most of us, even when we are lucky enough to get our revenge, we must
pay for it, sometimes in actual dollars. While you are not only in a
position to get your revenge, clear your mother's name, but the balm
with which you will assuage her injury will have a collateral value
which can be translated into the things which a young man needs, which
are his due and which, whether we like it or not, may be had only in
exchange for hard dollars*' and Bon not saying What do you mean? and not
moving yet; that is, the lawyer would not be aware that he was beginning
to move, continuing (the lawyer) smooth and easy: 'And more than this,
than the revenge, as lagniappe to the revenge as it were, this nosegay
of an afternoon, this scentless prairie flower which will not be missed
and which might as well bloom in your lapel as in another's; this *How
do you young men put it?7a nice little piece*' and then he would see
Bon, maybe the eyes, maybe he would just hear the feet moving. And then,
pistol (derringer, horse pistol, revolver, whatever it was) and all, he
would be crouched back against the wall behind the overturned chair,
snarling, 'Stand back! Stop!â then screaming 'Help! Help! He*!' then
just screaming, because he would hear and feel his own wrenching bones
before he could free his fingers of the pistol, and his neck bone too as
Bon would strike him with the palm on one cheek and then with the back
of the hand on the other; maybe he could even hear Bon too saying, 'Stop
it. Hush. I'm not going to hurt you' or maybe it was the lawyer in him
that said the Hush which he obeyed, who got him back into the righted
chair again, half lying upon the desk; the lawyer in him that warned him
not to say You will {gay for this but instead to half lie there, nursing
his wrenched hand in his handkerchief while Bon stood looking down at
him, holding the pistol by the barrel against his leg, saying, 'If you
feel that you require satisfaction, of course you know*' and the lawyer,
sitting back now, dabbing the handkerchief at his cheek now: 'I was
wrong. I misunderstood your feeling about the matter. I ask your pardon'
and Bon: 'Granted. As you wish. I will accept either an apology or a
bullet, as you prefer' and the lawyer (there would be a faint fading red
in his cheek, but that would be all: nothing in the voice or in the
eyes): 'I see you are going to collect full measure for my unfortunate
misconceptionieven ridicule. Even if I felt that 2%0

Page 245

right was on my side (which I do not) I would still have to decline your
offer. I would not be your equal with pistols' and Bon: âNor with knives
or rapiers too?â and the lawyer, smooth and easy: âNor knives or rapiers
too.' So that now the lawyer wouldn't even need to say You will pay for
this because Bon would be saying that for him, who would stand there
with the lax pistol, thinking But only with knives or pistols or
rapiers. So I cant beat him. I could shoot him. I would shoot him with
no more compunction than I would a snake or a man who cuckolded me. But
he would still beat me. thinking Yes. He did beat me while heihei
("Listen," Shreve said, cried. "It would be while he would be lying in a
bedroom of that private house in Corinth after Pittsburg Landing while
his shoulder got well two years later and the letter from the octoroon
(maybe even the one that contained the photograph of her and the child)
finally overtaking him, wailing for money and telling him that the
lawyer had departed for Texas or Mexico or somewhere at last and that
she (the octoroon) could not find his mother either and so without doubt
the lawyer had murdered her before he stole the money, since it would be
just like both of them to flee or get themselves killed without
providing for her at all.")7Yes, they knew now. And Jesus, think of him,
Bon, who had wanted to know, who had had the most reason to want to
know, who as far as he knew had never had any father but had been
created somehow between that woman who wouldn't let him play with other
children, and that lawyer who even told the woman whether or not each
time she bought a piece of meat or a loaf of breaditwo people neither of
whom had taken pleasure or found passion in getting him or suffered pain
and travail in borning himiwho perhaps if one of the two had only told
him the truth, none of what happened would ever have come to pass; while
there was Henry who had father and security and contentment and all, yet
was told the truth by both of them while he (Bon) was told by neither.
And think of Henry, who ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 246

of his heredity and training which said No. No. You cannot. You must
not. You shall not. Maybe they would even be under fire now, with the
shells rushing and rumbling past overhead and bursting and them lying
there waiting to charge and Henry would cry again, âBut that Lorraine
duke did it! There must have been lots in the world who have done it
that people dont know about, that maybe they suffered for it and died
for it and are in hell now for it. But they did it and it dont matter
now; even the ones we do know about are just names now and it dont
matter now' and Bon watching him and listening to him and thinking It's
because I dont know myself what I am going to do and so he is aware that
I am undecided without knowing that he is aware. Perhaps i f I told him
now that I am going to do it, he would know his own mind and tell me,
You shall not. And maybe your old man was right this time and they did
think maybe the war would settle it and they would not have to
themselves, or at least maybe Henry hoped it would because maybe your
old man was right here too and Bon didn't care; that since both of the
two people who could have given him a father had declined to do it,
nothing mattered to him now, revenge or love or all, since he knew now
that revenge could not compensate him nor love assuage. Maybe it wasn't
even Henry who wouldn't let him write to Judith but Bon himself who did
not write her because he didn't care about anything, not even that he
didn't know yet what he was going to do. Then it was the next year and
Bon was an officer now and they were moving toward Shiloh without
knowing that either, talking again as they moved along in column, the
officer dropping back alongside the file in which the private marched
and Henry crying again, holding his desperate and urgent voice down to
undertone: âDont you know yet what you are going to do?â while Bon would
look at him for a moment with that expression which could have been
smiling: âSuppose I told you I did not intend to go back to her?â and
Henry would walk there beside him, with his pack and his eight feet of
musket, and he would begin to pant, panting and panting while Bon
watched him: I am out in front of you a lot now; going into battle,
charging, I will be out in front of you*' and Henry panting, âStop!
Stop!â and Bon watching him with that faint thin expression about the
mouth and eyes: 'iand who would ever know? You would not even have to
know for certain yourself, because who could say but 274

Page 247

what a Yankee ball might have struck me at the exact second you pulled
your trigger, or even before*' and Henry panting and looking, glaring at
the sky, with his teeth showing and the sweat on his face and the
knuckles of the hand on his musket butt white, saying, panting, 'Stop!
Stop! Stop! Stop!' Then it was Shiloh, the second day and the lost
battle and the brigade falling back from Pittsburg Landing And listen,"
Shreve cried; "wait, now; wait!" (glaring at Quentin, panting himself,
as if he had had to supply his shade not only with a cue but with breath
to obey it in): "Because your old man was wrong here, too! He said it
was Bon who was wounded, but it wasn't. Because who told him? Who told
Sutpen, or your grandfather either, which of them it was who was hit?
Sutpen didn't know because he wasn't there, and your grandfather wasn't
there either because that was where he was hit too, where he lost his
arm. So who told them? Not Henry, because his father never saw Henry but
that one time and maybe they never had time to talk about wounds and
besides to talk about wounds in the Confederate army in 1865 would be
like coal miners talking about soot; and not Bon, because Sutpen never
saw him at all because he was dead; it was not Bon, it was Henry; Bon
that found Henry at last and stooped to pick him up and Henry fought
back, struggled, saying, 'Let be! Let me die! I wont have to know it
then' and Bon said, 'So you do want me to go back to her' and Henry lay
there struggling and panting, with the sweat on his face and his teeth
bloody inside his chewed lip, and Bon said, 'Say you do want me to go
back to her. Maybe then I wont do it. Say it' and Henry lay

Page 248

since it was '64 and then '65 and the starved and ragged remnant of an
army having retreated across Alabama and Georgia and into Carolina,
swept onward not by a victorious army behind it but rather by a mounting
tide of the names of lost battles from either side7Chickamauga and
Franklin, Vicksburg and Corinth and Atlantaibattles lost not alone
because of superior numbers and failing ammunition and stores, but
because of generals who should not have been generals, who were generals
not through training in contemporary methods or aptitude for learning
them, but by the divine right to say âGo there' conferred upon them by
an absolute caste system; or because the generals of it never lived long
enough to learn how to fight massed cautious accretionary battles, since
they were already as obsolete as Richard or Roland or du Guesclin, who
wore plumes and cloaks lined with scarlet at twentyieight and thirty and
thirtyitwo and captured warships with cavalry charges but no grain nor
meat nor bullets, who would whip three separate armies in as many days
and then tear down their own fences to cook meat robbed from their own
smokehouses, who on one night and with a handful of men would gallantly
set fire to and destroy a million dollar garrison of enemy supplies and
on the next night be discovered by a neighbor in bed with his wife and
be shot to death; two, four, now two again, according to Quentin and
Shreve, the two the four the two still talkingithe one who did not yet
know what he was going to do, the other who knew what he would have to
do yet could not reconcile himselfiHenry citing himself authority for
incest, talking about his Duke John of Lorraine as if he hoped possibly
to evoke that condemned and excommunicated shade to tell him in person
that it was all right, as people both before and since have tried to
evoke God or devil to justify them in what their glands insisted upon;
the two the four the two facing one another in the tomblike room:
Shreve, the Canadian, the child of blizzards and of cold in a bathrobe
with an overcoat above it, the collar turned up about his ears; Quentin,
the Southerner, the morose and delicate offspring of rain and steamy
heat in the thin suitable clothing which he had brought from
Mississippi, his overcoat (as thin and vain for what it was as the suit)
lying on the floor where he had not even bothered to raise it: (*the
winter of '64 now, the army retreated across Alabama, into Georgia; now
Carolina was just at their backs and Bon, the officer, 2 76

Page 249

thinking 'We will either be caught and annihilated or Old Joe will
extricate us and we will make contact with Lee in front 0 f Richmond and
then we will at least have the privilege of surrender'. and then one day
all 0 f a sudden he thought 0 f it, remembered, how that Jefferson
regiment o f which his father was now colonel was in Longstreet's corps,
and maybe from that moment the whole purpose 0 f the retreat seemed to
him to be that of bringing him within reach 0 f his father, to give his
father one more chance. So that it must have seemed to him now that he
knew at last why he had not been able to decide what he wanted to do.
Maybe he thought for just a second, 'My God, I am still young; even
after these four years I am still young' but just for a second, because
maybe in the same breath he said, 'All right. Then I am young. But I
still believe, even though what I believe probably is that war,
suffering, these four years 0 f keeping his men alive and able in order
to swap them blood and flesh for the largest amount of ground at its
bargain price, will have changed him (which I know that it does not do)
to where he will say to me not: Forgive me: but: You are my oldest son.
Protect your sister; never see either 0 f us again:' Then it was '65 and
what was left 0 f the Army 0 f the West with nothing remaining now but
the ability to walk backward slow and stubborn and to endure musketry
and shelling; maybe they didn't even miss the shoes and overcoats and
food any more now and that was why he could write about the captured
stove polish like he did in the letter to Judith when he finally knew
what he was going to do at last and told Henry and Henry said 'Thank
God. Thank God', not for the incest of course but because at last they
were going to do something, at last he could be something even though
that something was the irrevocable repudiation of the old heredity and
training and the acceptance of eternal damnation. Maybe he could even
quit talking about his Lorraine duke then, because he could say now, 'It
isn't yours nor his nor the Pope's hell that we are all going to: it's
my mother's and her mother's and father's and their mothers' and
fathers' hell, and it isn't you who are going there, but we, the
threeino: four 0 f us. And so at least we will all be together where we
belong, since even i f only he went there we would still have to be
there too since the three of us are just illusions that he begot, and
your illusions are a part 0 f you like your bones and flesh and memory.
And we will all be together in torment and so we will not need to
remember love and fornication, and 277

Page 250

maybe in torment you cannot even remember why you are there. And i f we
cannot remember all this, it cant be much torment'. Then they were in
Carolina, that January and February of '6S and what was left of them had
been walking backward for almost a year now and the distance between
them and Richmond was less far than the distance they had come; the
distance between them and the end a good deal less far. But to Bon it
was not the space between them and defeat but the space between him and
the other regiment, between him and the hour, the moment: 'He will not
even have to ask me; 1 will just touch flesh with him and 1 will say it
myself: You will not need to worry; she shall never see me again'. Then
March in Carolina and still the walking backward slow and stubborn and
listening to the Northward now because there was nothing to hear from
any other direction because in all the other directions it was finished
now, and all they expected to hear from the North was defeat. Then one
day (he was an officer; he would have known, heard, that Lee had
detached some troops and sent them down to reinforce them; perhaps he
even knew the names and numbers 0 f the regiments before they arrived)
he saw Sutpen. Maybe that first time Sutpen actually did not see him,
maybe that first time he could tell himself, 'That was why; he didn't
see me, so that he had to put himself in Sutpen's way, make his chance
and situation. Then for the second time he looked at the expressionless
and rocklike face, at the pale boring eyes in which there was no
flicker, nothing, the face in which he saw his own features, in which he
saw recognition, and that was all. That was all, there was nothing
further now; perhaps he just breathed once quietly, with on his own face
that expression which might at a glance have been called smiling while
he thought, '1 could force him. I could go to him and force him, knowing
that he would not because it was all finished now, that was all 0 f it
now and at last. ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 251

only He just didn't think to notify us, and not only not shoes and
clothing but not even any need for them, and not only no land nor any
way to make food, but no need for the food since we have learned to live
without that too; and so i f you dont have God and you dont need food
and clothes and shelter, there isn't anything for honor and pride to
climb on and hold to and flourish. And if you haven't got honor and
pride, then nothing matters. Only there is something in you that doesn't
care about honor and pride yet that lives, that even walks backward for
a whole year just to live; that probably even when this is over and
there is not even defeat left, will still decline to sit still in the
sun and die, but will be out in the woods, moving and seeking where just
will and endurance could not move it, grubbing for roots and suchithe
old mindless sentient undreaming meat that doesn't even know any
difference between despair and victory, Henry'. And then Henry would
begin to say 'Thank God. Thank God' panting and saying 'Thank God,
saying, 'Dont try to explain it. just do it' and Bon: 'You authorise me?
As her brother you give me permission?â and Henry: 'Brother? Brother?
You are the oldest: why do you ask me?â and Bon: 'No. He has never
acknowledged me. He just warned me. You are the brother and the son. Do
1 have your permission, Henry?â and Henry: 'Write. Write. Write'. So Bon
wrote the letter, after the four years, and Henry read it and sent it
off. But they didn't quit then and follow the letter. They still walked
backward, slow and stubborn, listening toward the North for the end 0 f
it because it takes an awful lot 0 f character to quit anything when you
are losing, and they had been walking backward slow for a year now so
all they had left was not the will but just the ability, the grooved
habit to endure. Then one night they had stopped again since Sherman had
stopped again, and an orderly came along the bivouac line and found
Henry at last and said, 'Sutpen, the colonel wants you in his tent. "And
so you and the old dame, the be a ghost but nevertheless having to be
one for all that, since he was born and bred in the deep South the same
as she wasithe two separate Quentins now

Page 252

that Clytie's trouble wasn't anger nor even distrust; it was terror,
fear. And she didn't tell you in so many words because she was still
keeping that secret for the sake of the man who had been her father too
as well as for the sake of the family which no longer existed, whose
hereitoifore inviolate and rotten mausoleum she still guarded;*didn't
tell you in so many words anymore than she told you in so many words how
she had been in the room that day when they brought Bon's body in and
Judith took from his pocket the metal case she had given him with her
picture in it; she didn't tell you, it just came out of the terror and
the fear after she turned you loose and caught the Aunt Rosa's arm and
the Aunt Rosa turned and struck her hand away and went on to the stairs
and Clytie ran at her again and this time the Aunt Rosa stopped and
turned on the second step and knocked Clytie down with her fist like a
man would and turned and went on up the stairs: and Clytie lay there on
the floor, more than eighty years old and not much more than five feet
tall and looking like a little bundle of clean rags so that you went and
took her arm and helped her up and her arm felt like a stick, as light
and dry and brittle as a stick: and she looked at you and you saw it was
not rage but terror, and not nigger terror because it was not about
herself but was about whatever it was that was up stairs, that she had
kept hidden up there for almost four years; and she didn't tell you in
the actual words because even in the terror she kept the secret;
nevertheless she told you, or at least all of a sudden you knew He
ceased again. It was just as well, since he had no listener. Perhaps he
was aware of it. Then suddenly he had no talker either, though possibly
he was not aware of this. Because now neither of them was there. They
were both in Carolina and the time was fortyisix years ago, and it was
not even four now but compounded still further, since now both of them
were Henry Sutpen and both of them were Bon, compounded each of both yet
either neither, smelling the very smoke which had blown and faded away
fortyisix years ago from the bivouac fires burning in a pine grove, the
gaunt and ragged men sitting or lying about them, talking not about the
war yet all curiously enough (or perhaps not curiously at all) facing
the South where further on in the darkness the pickets stoodithe pickets
who, watching to the South, could see the flicker and gleam of the
Federal bivouac fires myriad and faint and z80

Page 253

encircling half the horizon and counting ten fires for each Confederate
one, and between whom and which (Rebel picket and Yankee fire) the
Yankee outposts watched the darkness also, the two picket lines so close
that each could hear the challenge 0 f the other's officers passing from
post to post and dying away: and when gone, the voice, invisible,
cautious, not loud yet carrying: *Hey, Reb. *Yah. *Where you Tellers
going? *Richmond. 780 are we. Why not wait for us? *We air. The men
about the fires would not hear this exchange, though they would
presently hear the orderly plainly enough as he passes from fire to
fire, asking for Sutpen and being directed on and so reaches the fire at
last, the smoldering log, with his monotonous speech: 'Sutpen? I'm
looking for Sutpen' until Henry sits up and says, 'Here.' He is gaunt
and ragged and unshaven; because of the last four years and because he
had not quite got his height when the four years began, he is not as
tall by two inches as he gave promise of being, and not as heavy by
thirty pounds as he probably will be a few years after he has outlived
the four years, i f he do outlive them. *Here, he says.7What is it? *The
colonel wants you. The orderly does not return with him. Instead, he
walks alone through the darkness along a rutted road, a road rutted and
cut and churned where the guns have passed over it that afternoon, and
reaches the tent at last, one of the few tents, the canvas wall gleaming
faintly from a candle within, the silhouette of a sentry before it, who
challenges him. *Sutpen, Henry says.*The colonel sent for me. The sentry
gestures him into the tent. He stoops through the entrance, the canvas
falls behind him as someone, the only occupant of the tent, rises from a
camp chair behind the table on which the candle sits, his shadow
swooping high and huge up the canvas wall. He (Henry) comes to salute
facing a gray sleeve with colonel's braid on it, one bearded cheek, a
jutting nose, a shaggy droop of ironiriddled hairiia face which Henry 2
8i

Page 254

does not recognise, not because he has not seen it in four years and
does not expect to see it here and now, but rather because he is not
looking at it. He just salutes the braided cuff and stands so until the
other says, *Henry. Even now Henry does not start. He just stands so,
the two 0 f them stand so, looking at one another. It is the older man
who moves first, though they meet in the center of the tent, where they
embrace and kiss before Henry is aware that he has moved, was going to
move, moved by what of close blood which in the reflex instant arrogates
and reconciles even though it does not yet (perhaps never will) forgive,
who stands now while his father holds his face between both hands,
looking at it. *Henry, Sutpen says.*My son. Then they sit, one on either
side of the table, in the chairs reserved for officers, the table (an
open map lies on it) and the candle between them. *You were hit at
Shiloh, Colonel Willow tells me, Sutpen says. *Yes, sir, Henry says. He
is about to say Charles carried me back but he does not, because already
he knows what is coming. He does not even think Surely Judith didn't
write him about that letter or It was Clytie who sent him word somehow
that Charles has written her. He thinks neither 0 f these. To him it is
logical and natural that their father should know of his and Bon's
decision: that rapport o f blood which should bring Bon to decide to
write, himself to agree to it and their father to know of it at the same
identical instant, after a period 0 f four years, out o f all time. Now
it does come, almost exactly as he has known that it will: ,1 have seen
Charles Bon, Henry. Henry says nothing. It is coming now. He says
nothing, he merely stares at his fatherithe two of them in leafifaded
gray, a single candle, a crude tent walling them away from a darkness
where alert pickets face one another and where weary men sleep without
shelter, waiting for dawn and the firing, the weary backward walking to
commence again: yet in a second tent candle gray and all are gone and it
is the hollyidecked Christmas library at Sutpen's Hundred four years ago
and the table not a camp table suitable for the spreading of maps but
the heavy carved rosewood one at home with the group photograph o f his
mother and sister and himself sitting upon it, his father behind the
table and behind his z8z

Page 255

and leaned against a pine, leaning quietly and easily, with his head
back so he could look up at the shabby shaggy branches like something in
wrought iron spreading motionless against the chill vivid stars of early
spring, thinking 1 hope he remembers to thank Colonel Willow for letting
us use his tent, thinking not what he would do but what he would have to
do. Because he knew what he would do; it now depended on what Bon would
do, would force him to do, since he knew that he would do it. So I must
go to him, he thought, thinking, Now it is better than two oclock and it
will be dawn soon. Then it was dawn, or almost, and it was cold: a chill
which struck through the worn patched thin clothing, through the
something of weariness and undernourishment; the passive ability, not
the volitional will, to endure, there was light somewhere, enough of it
for him to distinguish Bon's sleeping face from among the others where
he lay wrapped in his blankets, beneath his spread cloak, enough light
for him to wake Bon by and for Bon to distinguish his face (or perhaps
something communicated by Henry's hand) because Bon does not speak,
demand to know who it is: he merely rises and puts the cloak about his
shoulders and approaches the smoldering fire and is kicking it into a
blaze when Henry speaks: *Wait. Bon pauses and looks at Henry; ..ERR,
COD:lâ

Page 256

*So it's the miscegenation, not the incest, which you cant bear. Henry
doesn't answer. *And he sent me no word? He did not ask you to send me
to him? No word to me, no word at all? That was all he had to do, now,
today; four years ago or at any time during the four years. That was
all. He would not have needed to ask it, require it, of me. I would have
offered it. I would have said, I will never see her again before he
could have asked it of me. He did not have to do this, Henry. He didn't
need to tell you Or perhaps the reason was the one which Miss Rosa told
you and which the aunt gave her: that now since he had got out of his
fatheriinilaw all which Mr Coldfield possessed that Sutpen could have
used or wanted, he (Sutpen) had neither the courage to face 49

Page 257

pistol; now he is not only panting, he is trembling; when he speaks now
his voice is not even the exhalation, it is the suffused and suffocating
inbreath itself. *You are my brother. *No I'm not. I'm the nigger that's
going to sleep with your sister. Unless you stop me, Henry. Suddenly
Henry grasps the pistol, jerks it free 0 f Bon's hand and stands so, the
pistol in his hand, panting and panting; again Bon can see the whites o
f his inrolled eyes while he sits on the log and watches Henry with that
faint expression about the eyes and mouth which might be smiling. *Do it
now, Henry, he says. Henry whirls; in the same motion he hurls the
pistol from him and stoops again, gripping Bon by both shoulders,
panting. *You shall not! he says.7You shall not! Do you hear me? Bon
does not move beneath the gripping hands; he sits motionless, with his
faint fixed grimace; his voice is gentler than that first breath in
which the pine branches begin to move a little: *You will have to stop
me, Henry. "And he never ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 258

in his swaddling of garments. "Dont you know? It was because he said to
himself, 'if Henry dont mean what he said, it will be all right; I can
take it out and destroy it. But if he does mean what he said, it will be
the only way I will have to say to her, I was no good; do not grieve for
me.' Aint that right? Aint it? By God, aint it?" "Yes," Quentin said.
"Come on," Shreve said. "Let's get outiof this refrigerator and go to
bed. "

Page 259

A t first, in bed in the dark, it seemed colder than ever, as if there
had been some puny quality of faint heat in the single light bulb before
Shreve turned it off and that now the iron and impregnable dark had
become one with the iron and icelike bedclothing lying upon the flesh
slacked and thiniclad for sleeping. Then the darkness seemed to breathe,
to flow back; the window which Shreve had opened became visible against
the faintly unearthly glow of the outer snow as, forced by the weight of
the darkness, the blood surged and ran warmer, warmer. "University of
Mississippi," Shreve's voice said in the darkness to Quentin 's right.
"Bayard attenuated forty miles (it was forty miles, wasn't it?); out of
the wilderness proud honor semestrial regurgitant." "Yes," Quentin said.
"They were in the tenth graduating class since it was founded." "I
didn't know there were ten in Mississippi that went to school at one
time," Shreve said. Quentin didn't answer. He lay watching the rectangle
of window, feeling the warming blood driving through his veins, his arms
and legs. And now, although he was warm and though while he had sat in
the cold room he merely shook faintly and steadily, now he began to jerk
all over, violently and uncontrollably until he could even hear the bed,
until even Shreve felt it and turned, raising himself (by the sound)
onto his elbow to look at Quentin, though Quentin himself felt perfectly
all right. He felt fine even, lying there and waiting 2.88

Page 260

in peaceful curiosity for the next violent unharbingered jerk to come.
"Jesus, are you that cold?" Shreve said. "Do you want me to spread the
overcoats on you?" "No," Quentin said. "I'm not cold. I'm all right. I
feel fine." "Then what are you doing that for?" "I dont know. I cant
help it. I feel fine." "All right. But let me know if you want the
coats. Jesus, if I was going to have to spend nine months in this
climate, I would sure hate to have come from the South. Maybe I wouldn't
come from the South anyway, even if I could stay there. Wait. Listen.
I'm not trying to be funny, smart. I just want to understand it if I can
and I dont know how to say it better. Because it's something my people
haven't got. Or if we have got it, it all happened long ago across the
water and so now there aint anything to look at every day to remind us
of it. We dont live among defeated grandfathers and freed slaves (or
have I got it backward and was it your folks that are free and the
niggers that lost?) and bullets in the dining room table and such, to be
always reminding us to never forget. What is it? something you live and
breathe in like air? a kind of vacuum filled with wraithlike and
indomitable anger and pride and glory at and in happenings that occurred
and ceased fifty years ago? a kind of entailed birthright father and son
and father and son of never forgiving General Sherman, so that forever
more as long as your children's children produce children you wont be
anything but a descendant of a long line of colonels killed in Pickett's
charge at Manassas?" "Gettysburg," Quentin said. "You cant understand
it. You would have to be born there." "Would I then?" Quentin did not
answer. "Do you understand it?" "I dont know," Quentin said. "Yes, of
course I understand it." They breathed in the darkness. After a moment
Quentin said: "I dont know." "Yes. You dont know. You dont even know
about the old dame, the Aunt Rosa." "Miss Rosa," Quentin said. "All
right. You dont even know about her. Except that she refused at the last
to be a ghost. That after almost fifty years she couldn't reconcile
herself to letting him lie dead in peace. That even after fifty years
she not only could get up and go out there to finish up what she z8q

Page 261

found she hadn't quite completed, but she could find someone to go with
her and bust into that locked house because instinct or something told
her it was not finished yet. Do you?" "No," Quentin said peacefully. He
could taste the dust. Even now, with the chill pure weight of the
snowibreathed New England air on his face, he could taste and feel the
dust of that breathless (rather, furnacei breathed) Mississippi
September night. He could even smell the old woman in the buggy beside
him, smell the fusty camphorireeking shawl and even the airless black
cotton umbrella in which (he would not discover until they had reached
the house) she had concealed a hatchet and a flashlight. He could smell
the horse; he could hear the dry plaint of the light wheels in the
weightless permeant dust and he seemed to feel the dust itself move
sluggish and dry across his sweating flesh just as he seemed to hear the
single profound suspiration of the parched earth's agony rising toward
the imponderable and aloof stars. Now she spoke, for the first time
since they had left Jefferson, since she had climbed into the buggy with
a kind of clumsy and fumbling and trembling eagerness (which he thought
derived from terror, alarm, until he found that he was quite wrong)
before he could help her, to sit on the extreme edge of the seat, small,
in the fusty shawl and clutching the umbrella, leaning forward as if by
leaning forward she would arrive the sooner, arrive immediately after
the horse and before he, Quentin, would, before the prescience of her
desire and need could warn its consummation. "Now," she said. "We are on
the Domain. On his land, his and Ellen's and Ellen's descendants. They
have taken it away from them since, I understand. But it still belongs
to him, to Ellen and her descendants." But Quentin was already aware of
that. Before she spoke he had said to himself, 'Now. Now' and (as during
the long hot afternoon in ..ERR, COD:l..

Page 262

to him than she would have said it to God; this the notiall, since at
least there was breathing left. Now Quentin began to breathe hard again,
who had been peaceful for a time in the warm bed, breathing hard the
heady pure snowborn darkness. She (Miss Coldfield) did not let him enter
the gate. She said "Stop" suddenly; he felt her hand flutter on his arm
and he thought, 'Why, she is afraid'. He could hear her panting now, her

voice almost a wail of diffident yet iron determination: "I dont know
what to do. I dont know what to do." ('I do,' he thought. 'Go back to
town and go to bed.') But he did not say it. He looked at the two huge

rotting gate posts in the starlight, between which no gates swung now,
wondering from what direction Bon and Henry had ridden up that day,
wondering what had cast the shadow which Bon was not to pass alive; if
some living tree which still lived and bore leaves and shed or if some
tree gone, vanished, burned for warmth and food years ago now or perhaps
just gone; or if it had been one of the two posts themselves, thinking,
wishing that Henry were there now to stop Miss Coldfield and turn them
back, telling himself that if Henry were there now, there would be no
shot to be heard by anyone. "She's going to try to stop me," Miss
Coldfield whimpered. "I know she is. Maybe this far from town, out here
alone at midnight, she will even let that negro man And you didn't even
bring a pistol. Did you?" "Nome," Quentin said. "What is it she's got
hidden there? What could it be? And what difference does it make? Let's
go back to town, Miss Rosa." She didn't answer this at all. She just
said, "That's what I have got qu

Page 263

to find out", sitting forward on the seat, trembling now and peering up
the treeiarched drive toward where the rotting shell of the house would
be. "And now I will have to find it out," she whimpered, in a kind of
amazed selfipity. She moved suddenly. "Come," she whispered, beginning
to get out of the buggy. "Wait," Quentin said. "Let's drive up to the
house. It's a half a mile." "No, no," she whispered, a tense fierce
hissing of words filled with that same curious terrified yet implacable
determination, as though it were not she who had to go and find out but
she only the helpless agent of someone or something else who must know.
"Hitch the horse here. Hurry." She got out, scrambled awkwardly down,
before he could help her, clutching the umbrella. It seemed to him that
he could still hear her whimpering panting where she waited close beside
one of the posts while he led the mare from the road and tied one rein
about a sapling in the weedichoked ditch. He could not see her at all,
so close she stood against the post: she just stepped out and fell in
beside him when he passed and turned into the gate, still breathing in
those whimpering pants as they walked on up the rutted treeiarched
drive. The darkness was intense; she stumbled; he caught her. She took
his arm, clutching it in a dead rigid hard grip as if her fingers, her
hand, were a small mass of wire. "I will have to take your arm," she
whispered, whimpered. "And you haven't even got a pistol7Wait," she
said. She stopped. He turned; he could not see her but he could hear her
hurried breathing and then a rustling of cloth. Then she was prodding
something at him. "Here," she whispered. "Take it." It was a hatchet;
not sight but touch told him 7a hatchet with a heavy worn handle and a
heavy gapped rustidulled blade. "What?" he said. "Take it!" she
whispered, hissed. "You didn't bring a pistol. It's something." "Here,"
he said; "wait." "Come," she whispered. "You will have to let me take
your arm, I am trembling so bad." They went on again, she clinging to
one of his arms, the hatchet in his other hand. "We will probably need
it to get into the house, anyway," she said, stumbling along beside him,
almost dragging him. "I just know she is somewhere watching us," she
whimi 292

Page 264

"Break it!" she hissed. "It belonged to Ellen. I am her sister, her only
living heir. Break it. Hurry." He pushed against the door. It did not

move. She panted beside him. "Hurry," she said. "Break it." "Listen,
Miss Rosa," he said. "Listen." "Give me the hatchet." "Wait," he said.
"Do you really want to go inside?" "I'm going inside," she whimpered.
"Give me the hatchet." "Wait," he said. He moved along the gallery,

guiding himself by the wall, moving carefully since he did not know just
where the floor planks might be rotten or even missing, until he came to
a window. The shutters were closed and apparently locked, yet they gave
almost at once to the blade of the hatchet, making not very much soundia
flimsy and sloven barricading done either by an old feeble
personiwomanior by a shiftless man; he had already inserted the hatchet
blade beneath the sash before he discovered that there was no glass in
it, that all he had to do now was to step through the vacant frame. Then
he stood there for a moment, telling himself to go on in, telling
himself that he was not afraid, he just didn't want to know what might
be inside. "Well?" Miss Coldfield whispered from the door. "Have you
opened it?" "Yes," he said. He did not whisper, though he did not speak
overloud; the dark room which he faced repeated his voice with hollow
profundity, as an unfurnished room will. "You wait there. I'll see if I
can open the door."*'So now I shall have to go in,' he thought, climbing
over the sill. He knew that the room was empty; the echo of his voice
had told him that, yet he moved as slowly and carefully here as he had
along the gallery, feeling along the wall with his hand, following the
wall when it turned, and found the door and passed through it. He would
be in the hall now; he almost believed that he could hear Miss Coldfield
breathing just beyond the wall beside him. It was pitch dark; he could
not see, he knew that he could not see, yet he found that his eyelids
and muscles were aching with strain while merging and dissolving red
spots wheeled and vanished across the retinae. He went on, he felt the
door under his hand at last and now he could hear Miss Coldfield's
whimpering breathing beyond it as he fumbled for the lock. Then behind
him the sound of the scraped match was like an explosion, a pistol; even
before the puny following light appeared all his organs lifted
sickeningly; he could not 294

Page 265

even move for a moment even though something of sanity roared silently
inside his skull: 'lt's all right! If it were danger, he would not have
struck the match!â Then he could move, and turned to see the tiny
gnomelike creature in headrag and voluminous skirts, the worn
coffeeicolored face staring at him, the match held in one coffeeicolored
and dollilike hand above her head. Then he was not watching her but
watching the match as it burned down toward her fingers; he watched
quietly as she moved at last and lit a second match from the first and
turned; he saw then the squareiended saw chunk beside the wall and the
lamp sitting upon it as she lifted the chimney and held the match to the
wick. He remembered it, lying here in the Massachusetts bed and
breathing fast now, now that peace and quiet had fled again. He
remembered how she did not say one word to him, not Who are you? or What
do you want here? but merely came with a bunch of enormous old fashioned
iron keys, as if she had known all the time that this hour must come and
that it could not be resisted, and opened the door and stepped back a
little as Miss Coldfield entered. And how she (Clytie) and Miss
Coldfield said no word to one another, as if Clytie had looked once at
the other woman and knew that that would do no good; that it was to him,
Quentin, that she turned, putting her hand on his arm and saying, "Dont
let her go up there, young marster." And how maybe she looked at him and
knew that would do no good either, because she turned and overtook Miss
Coldfield and caught her arm and said, "Dont you go up there, Rosie" and
Miss Coldfield struck the hand away and went on toward the stairs (and
now he saw that she had a flashlight; he remembered how he thought, 'It
must have been in the umbrella too along with the axe') and Clytie said,
"Rosie" and ran after the other again, whereupon Miss Coldfield turned
on the step and struck Clytie to the floor with a fulliarmed blow like a
man would have, and turned and went on up the stairs. She (Clytie) lay
on the bare floor of the scaling and empty hall like a small shapeless
bundle of quiet clean rags. When he reached her he saw that she was
quite conscious, her eyes wide open and calm; he stood above her,
thinking, 'Yes. She is the one who owns the terror'. When he raised her
it was like picking up a handful of sticks concealed in a rag bundle, so
light she was. She could not stand; he had to hold her up, aware of some
feeble movement or intention in her limbs until he realised that she was
295

Page 266

trying to sit on the bottom step. He lowered her to it. "Who are you?"
she said. "I'm Quentin Compson," he answered. "Yes. I remember your
grandpaw. You go up there and make her come down. Make her go away from
here. Whatever he done, me and Judith and him have paid it out. You go
and get her. Take her away from here." So he mounted the stairs, the
worn bare treads, the cracked and scaling wall on one side, the
balustrade with its intermittent missing spindles on the other. He
remembered how he looked back and she was still sitting as he had left
her, and that now (and he had not heard him enter) there stood in the
hall below a hulking young lighticolored negro man in clean faded
overalls and shirt, his arms dangling, no surprise, no nothing in the
saddleicolored and slackimouthed idiot face. He remembered how he
thought, 'The scion, the heir, the apparent (though not obvious)â and
how he heard Miss Coldfield's feet and saw the light of the torch
approaching along the upper hall and how she came and passed him, how
she stumbled a little and caught herself and looked full at him as if
she had never seen him beforeithe eyes wide and unseeing like a
sleepwalker's, the face which had always been tallowihued now possessing
some still profounder, some almost unbearable, quality of
bloodlessnessiand he thought, 'What? What is it now? It's not shock. And
it never has been fear. Can it be triumph?â and how she passed him and
went on. He heard Clytie say to the man, "Take her to the gate, the
buggy" and he stood there thinking, 'I should go with her' and then,
'But I must see too now. I will have to. Maybe I shall be sorry
tomorrow, but I must see'. So when he came back down the stairs (and he
remembered how he thought, 'Maybe my face looks like hers did, but it's
not triumph') there was only Clytie in the hall, sitting still on the
bottom step, sitting still in the attitude in which he had left her. She
did not even look at him when he passed her. Nor did he overtake Miss
Coldfield and the negro. It was too dark to go fast, though he could
presently hear them ahead of him. She was not using the flashlight now;
he remembered how he thought, 'Surely she cant be afraid to show a light
now'. But she was not using it and he wondered if she were holding to
the negro's arm now; he wondered that until he heard the negro's voice,
flat, without emphasis or interest: "Wawkin better over here" and no
answer zq6

Page 267

from her, though he was close enough now to hear (or believe he did) her
whimpering panting breath. Then he heard the other sound and he knew
that she had stumbled and fallen; he could almost see the hulking
slackifaced negro stopped in his tracks, looking toward the sound of the
fall, waiting, without interest or curiosity, as he (Quentin) hurried
forward , hurried toward the voices: "You, nigger! What's your name?"
"Calls me Jim Bond." "Help me up! You aint any Sutpen! You dont have to
leave me lying in the dirt!" When he stopped the buggy at her gate she
did not offer to get out alone this time. She sat there until he got
down and came around to her side; she still sat there, clutching the
umbrella in one hand and the hatchet in the other, until he spoke her
name. Then she stirred; he helped, lifted her down; she was almost as
light as Clytie had been; when she moved it was like a mechanical doll,
so that he supported and led her through the gate and up the short walk
and into the dollisized house and turned on the light for her and looked
at the fixed sleepiwalking face, the wide dark eyes as she stood there,
still clutching the umbrella and the hatchet, the shawl and the black
dress both stained with dirt where she had fallen, the black bonnet
jerked forward and awry by the shock of the fall. "Are you all right
now?" he said. "Yes," she said. "Yes. I'm all right. Goodnight."7'Not
thank you,' he thought: 'Just goodnight', outside the house now,
breathing deep and fast now as he returned to the buggy, finding that he
was about to begin to run, thinking quietly, 'Jesus. Jesus. Jesus',
breathing fast and hard of the dark dead furnaceibreath of air, of night
where the fierce aloof stars hung. His own home was dark; he was still
using the whip when he turned into the lane and then into the stable
lot. He sprang out and took the mare from the buggy, stripping the
harness from her and tumbling it into the harness room without stopping
to hang it up, sweating, breathing fast and hard; when he turned at last
toward the house he did begin to run. He could not help it. He was
twenty years old; he was not afraid, because what he had seen out there
could not harm him, yet he ran; even inside the dark familiar house, his
shoes in his hand, he still ran, up the stairs and into his room and
began to undress, fast, sweating, 297

Page 268

breathing fast. 'I ought to bathe,' he thought: then he was lying on the
bed, naked, swabbing his body steadily with the discarded shirt,
sweating still, panting: so that when, his eyeimuscles aching and
straining into the darkness and the almost dried shirt still clutched in
his hand, he said 'I have been asleep' it was all the same, there was no
difference: waking or sleeping he walked down that upper hall between
the scaling walls and beneath the cracked ceiling, toward the faint
light which fell outward from the last door and paused there, saying
'No. No' and then 'Only I must. I have to' and went in, entered the bare
stale room whose shutters were closed too, where a second lamp burned
dimly on a crude table; waking or sleeping it was the same: the bed, the
yellow sheets and pillow, the wasted yellow face with closed, almost
transparent eyelids on the pillow, the wasted hands crossed on the
breast as if he were already a corpse; waking or sleeping it was the
same and would be the same forever as long as he lived: And you are*?
Henry Sutpen. And you have been here*? Four years. And you came home ?
To die. Yes. To die? Yes. To die. And you have been here Four years. And
you are*? Henry SutÂ¢en. It was quite cold in the room now; the chimes
would ring for one any time now; the chill had a compounded, a gathered
quality, as though preparing for the dead moment before dawn. "And she
waited three months before she went back to get him," Shreve said. "Why
did she do that?" Quentin didn't answer. He lay still and rigid on his
back with the cold New England night on his face and the blood running
warm in his rigid body and limbs, breathing hard but slow, his eyes wide
open upon the window, thinking 'Nevermore of peace. Nevermore of peace.
298

Page 269

Nevermore. Nevermore. Nevermore'. "Do you suppose it was because she
knew what was going to happen when she told it, took any steps, that it
would be over then, finished, and that hating is like drink or drugs and
she had used it so long that she did not dare risk cutting off the
supply, destroying the source, the very poppy's root and seed?" Still
Quentin didn't answer. "But at last she did reconcile herself to it, for
his sake, to save him, to bring him into town where the doctors could
save him, and so she told it then, got the ambulance and the men and
went out there. And old Clytie maybe watching for just that out of the
upstairs window for three months now: and maybe even your old man was
right this time and when she saw the ambulance turn into the gate she
believed it was that same black wagon for which she probably had had
that nigger boy watching for three months now, coming to carry Henry
into town for the white folks to hang him for shooting Charles Bon. And
I guess it had been him who had kept that closet under the stairs full
of tinder and trash all that time too, like she told him to, maybe he
not getting it then either but keeping it full just like she told him,
the kerosene and all, for three months now, until the hour when he could
begin to howls" Now the chimes began, ringing for one oclock. Shreve
ceased, as if he were waiting for them to cease or perhaps were even
listening to them. Quentin lay still too, as if he were listening too,
though he was not; he just heard them without listening as he heard
Shreve without listening or answering, until they ceased, died away into
the icy air delicate and faint and musical as struck glass. And he,
Quentin, could see that too, though he had not been thereithe ambulance
with Miss Coldfield between the driver and the second man, perhaps a
deputy sheriff, in the shawl surely and perhaps even with the umbrella
too, though probably no hatchet nor flashlight in it now, entering the
gate and picking its way gingerly up the rutted and frozen (and now
partially thawed) drive; and it may have been the howling or it may have
been the deputy or the driver or it may have been she who cried first:
"It's on fire!" though she would not have cried that; she would have
said, "Faster. Faster." leaning forward on this seat tooithe small
furious grim implacable woman not much larger than a child. But the
ambulance could not go fast in that drive; doubtless Clytie knew, 299

Page 270

counted upon, that; it would be a good three minutes before it could
reach the house, the monstrous tinderidry rotten shell seeping smoke
through the warped cracks in the weatheriboarding as if it were made of
gauze wire and filled with roaring and beyond which somewhere something
lurked which bellowed, something human since the bellowing was in human
speech, even though the reason for it would not have seemed to be. And
the deputy and the driver would spring out and Miss Coldfield would
stumble out and follow them, running too, onto the gallery too, where
the creature which bellowed followed them, wraithlike and insubstantial,
looking at them out of the smoke, whereupon the deputy even turned and
ran at him, whereupon he retreated, fled, though the howling did not
diminish nor even seem to get any further away. They ran onto the
gallery too, into the seeping smoke, Miss Coldfield screaming harshly,
"The window! The window!" to the second man at the door. But the door
was not locked; it swung inward; the blast of heat struck them. The
entire staircase was on fire. Yet they had to hold her; Quentin could
see it: the light thin furious creature making no sound at all now,
struggling with silent and bitter fury, clawing and scratching and
biting at the two men who held her, who dragged her back and down the
steps as the draft created by the open door seemed to explode like
powder among the flames as the whole lower hall vanished . He, Quentin,
could see it, could see the deputy holding her while the driver backed
the ambulance to safety and returned, the three faces all a little wild
now since they must have believed her; the three of them staring,
glaring at the doomed house: and then for a moment maybe Clytie appeared
in that window from which she must have been watching the gates
constantly day and night for three monthsithe tragic gnome's face
beneath the clean headrag, against a red background of fire, seen for a
moment between two swirls of smoke, looking down at them, perhaps not
even now with triumph and no more of despair than it had ever worn,
possibly even serene above the melting clapboards before the smoke
swirled across it again.*and he, Jim Bond, the scion, the last of his
race, seeing it too now and howling with human reason now since now even
he could have known what he was howling about. But they couldn't catch
him. They could hear him; he didn't seem to ever get any further away
but they couldn't get any nearer and maybe 300

Page 271

not answer, staring at the window; then he could not tell if it was the
actual window or the window's pale rectangle upon his eyelids, though
after a moment it began to emerge. It began to take shape in its same
curious, light, gravityidefying attitudeithe onceifolded sheet out of
the wistaria Mississippi summer, the cigar smell, the random blowing of
the fireflies. "The South," Shreve said. "The South. Jesus. No wonder
you folks all outlive yourselves by years and years and years." It was
becoming quite distinct; he would be able to decipher the words soon, in
a moment; even almost now, now, now. "I am older at twenty than a lot of
people who have died," Quentin said. "And more people have died than
have been twentyione," Shreve said. Now he (Quentin) could read it,
could finish itithe sloped whimsical ironic hand out of Mississippi
attenuated, into the iron snow: for perhaps there is. Surely it can harm
no one to believe that perhaps she has escaped not at all the privilege
of being outraged and amazed and o f not forgiving but on the contrary
has herself gained that place or bourne where the objects of the outrage
and of the commiseration 301

Page 272

also are no longer ghosts but are actual people to be actual recipients
o f the hatred and the pity. It will do no harm to hopeiYou see I have
written hope, not think. So let it be hope.*that the one cannot escape
the censure which no doubt he deserves, that the other no longer lack
the commiseration which let us hope (while we are hoping) that they have
longed for, if only for the reason that they are about to receive it
whether they will or no. The weather was beautiful though cold and they
had to use picks to break the earth for the grave yet in one of the
deeper clods I saw a redworm doubtless alive when the clod was thrown up
though by afternoon it was frozen again. "So it took Charles Bon and his
mother to get rid of old Tom, and Charles Bon and the octoroon to get
rid of Judith, and Charles Bon and Clytie to get rid of Henry; and
Charles Bon's mother and Charles Bon's grandmother got rid of Charles
Bon. get rid of one Sutpen, dont it?" Quentin did not answer; evidently
Shreve did not want an answer now; he continued almost without a pause:
"Which is all right, it's fine; it clears the whole ledger, you can tear
all the pages out and burn them, except for one thing. And do you know
what that is?" Perhaps he hoped for an answer this time, or perhaps he
merely paused for emphasis, since he got no answer. "You've got one
nigger left. One nigger Sutpen left. Of course you cant catch him and
you dont even always see him and you never will be able to use him. But
you've got him there still. You still hear him at night sometimes. Dont
you?" "Yes," Quentin said. "And so do you know what I think?" Now he did
expect an answer, and now he got one: "No," Quentin said. "Do you want
to know what I think?" "No," Quentin said. âThen Iâll tell you. I think that in time the Jim Bonds are going to conquer the western hemisphere. Of course it wonât quite be in our time and of course as they spread toward the poles they will bleach out again like the rabbit and the birds do, so they wonât show up so sharp against the snow. But it will still be Jim Bond; and so in a few thousand years, I who regard you will also have spring from the loins of African kings. Now I want you to tell me just one thing more. Why do you hate the South?â 
âI donât hate it,â Quentin said, quickly, at once, immediately; âI donât hate it,â he said. I donât hate it he thought, panting in the cold air, the iron New England dark: I donât. I donât! I donât hate it! I donât hate it! 